 He saw her from the bottom of the stairs
Before she saw him.  She was starting down,
Looking back over her shoulder at some fear.
She took a doubtful step and then undid it
To raise herself and look again.  He spoke
Advancing toward her:  'What is it you see
From up there always--for I want to know.'
She turned and sank upon her skirts at that,
And her face changed from terrified to dull.
He said to gain time:  'What is it you see,'
Mounting until she cowered under him.
'I will find out now--you must tell me, dear.'
She, in her place, refused him any help
With the least stiffening of her neck and silence.
She let him look, sure that he wouldn't see,
Blind creature; and awhile he didn't see.
But at last he murmured, 'Oh,' and again, 'Oh.'

'What is it--what?' she said.
					'Just that I see.'

'You don't,' she challenged.  'Tell me what it is.'

'The wonder is I didn't see at once.
I never noticed it from here before.
I must be wonted to it--that's the reason.
The little graveyard where my people are!
So small the window frames the whole of it.
Not so much larger than a bedroom, is it?
There are three stones of slate and one of marble,
Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight
On the sidehill.  We haven't to mind those.
But I understand:  it is not the stones,
But the child's mound--'

				'Don't, don't, don't, don't,' she cried.

She withdrew shrinking from beneath his arm
That rested on the bannister, and slid downstairs;
And turned on him with such a daunting look,
He said twice over before he knew himself:
'Can't a man speak of his own child he's lost?'

'Not you!  Oh, where's my hat?  Oh, I don't need it!
I must get out of here.  I must get air.
I don't know rightly whether any man can.'

'Amy!  Don't go to someone else this time.
Listen to me.  I won't come down the stairs.'
He sat and fixed his chin between his fists.
'There's something I should like to ask you, dear.'

'You don't know how to ask it.'

					'Help me, then.'

Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.

'My words are nearly always an offense.
I don't know how to speak of anything
So as to please you.  But I might be taught
I should suppose.  I can't say I see how.
A man must partly give up being a man
With women-folk.  We could have some arrangement
By which I'd bind myself to keep hands off
Anything special you're a-mind to name.
Though I don't like such things 'twixt those that love.
Two that don't love can't live together without them.
But two that do can't live together with them.'
She moved the latch a little.  'Don't--don't go.
Don't carry it to someone else this time.
Tell me about it if it's something human.
Let me into your grief.  I'm not so much
Unlike other folks as your standing there
Apart would make me out.  Give me my chance.
I do think, though, you overdo it a little.
What was it brought you up to think it the thing
To take your mother--loss of a first child
So inconsolably--in the face of love.
You'd think his memory might be satisfied--'

'There you go sneering now!'

					'I'm not, I'm not!
You make me angry.  I'll come down to you.
God, what a woman!  And it's come to this,
A man can't speak of his own child that's dead.'

'You can't because you don't know how to speak.
If you had any feelings, you that dug
With your own hand--how could you?--his little grave;
I saw you from that very window there,
Making the gravel leap and leap in air,
Leap up, like that, like that, and land so lightly
And roll back down the mound beside the hole.
I thought, Who is that man?  I didn't know you.
And I crept down the stairs and up the stairs
To look again, and still your spade kept lifting.
Then you came in.  I heard your rumbling voice
Out in the kitchen, and I don't know why,
But I went near to see with my own eyes.
You could sit there with the stains on your shoes
Of the fresh earth from your own baby's grave
And talk about your everyday concerns.
You had stood the spade up against the wall
Outside there in the entry, for I saw it.'

'I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed.
I'm cursed.  God, if I don't believe I'm cursed.'

'I can repeat the very words you were saying.
"Three foggy mornings and one rainy day
Will rot the best birch fence a man can build."
Think of it, talk like that at such a time!
What had how long it takes a birch to rot
To do with what was in the darkened parlor.
You couldn't care!  The nearest friends can go
With anyone to death, comes so far short
They might as well not try to go at all.
No, from the time when one is sick to death,
One is alone, and he dies more alone.
Friends make pretense of following to the grave,
But before one is in it, their minds are turned
And making the best of their way back to life
And living people, and things they understand.
But the world's evil.  I won't have grief so
If I can change it.  Oh, I won't, I won't!'

'There, you have said it all and you feel better.
You won't go now.  You're crying.  Close the door.
The heart's gone out of it:  why keep it up.
Amy!  There's someone coming down the road!'

'You--oh, you think the talk is all.  I must go--
Somewhere out of this house.  How can I make you--'

'If--you--do!'  She was opening the door wider.
'Where do you mean to go?  First tell me that.
I'll follow and bring you back by force.  I will!--'
 Love at the lips was touch
As sweet as I could bear;
And once that seemed too much;
I lived on air

That crossed me from sweet things,
The flow of—was it musk
From hidden grapevine springs
Downhill at dusk?

I had the swirl and ache
From sprays of honeysuckle
That when they're gathered shake
Dew on the knuckle.

I craved strong sweets, but those
Seemed strong when I was young;
The petal of the rose
It was that stung.

Now no joy but lacks salt,
That is not dashed with pain
And weariness and fault;
I crave the stain

Of tears, the aftermark
Of almost too much love,
The sweet of bitter bark
And burning clove.

When stiff and sore and scarred
I take away my hand
From leaning on it hard
In grass and sand,

The hurt is not enough:
I long for weight and strength
To feel the earth as rough
To all my length. 
 A Christmas circular letter
  
  
The city had withdrawn into itself  
And left at last the country to the country;  
When between whirls of snow not come to lie  
And whirls of foliage not yet laid, there drove  
A stranger to our yard, who looked the city,   
Yet did in country fashion in that there  
He sat and waited till he drew us out,  
A-buttoning coats, to ask him who he was.  
He proved to be the city come again  
To look for something it had left behind   
And could not do without and keep its Christmas.  
He asked if I would sell my Christmas trees;  
My woods—the young fir balsams like a place  
Where houses all are churches and have spires.  
I hadn't thought of them as Christmas trees.    
I doubt if I was tempted for a moment  
To sell them off their feet to go in cars  
And leave the slope behind the house all bare,  
Where the sun shines now no warmer than the moon.  
I'd hate to have them know it if I was.      
Yet more I'd hate to hold my trees, except  
As others hold theirs or refuse for them,  
Beyond the time of profitable growth—  
The trial by market everything must come to.  
I dallied so much with the thought of selling.      
Then whether from mistaken courtesy  
And fear of seeming short of speech, or whether  
From hope of hearing good of what was mine,  
I said, "There aren't enough to be worth while."
  
"I could soon tell how many they would cut,     
You let me look them over."  
 
                                    "You could look.  
But don't expect I'm going to let you have them."  
Pasture they spring in, some in clumps too close  
That lop each other of boughs, but not a few     
Quite solitary and having equal boughs  
All round and round. The latter he nodded "Yes" to,  
Or paused to say beneath some lovelier one,  
With a buyer's moderation, "That would do."  
I thought so too, but wasn't there to say so.   
We climbed the pasture on the south, crossed over,  
And came down on the north. 
 
                                    He said, "A thousand."  
  
"A thousand Christmas trees!—at what apiece?"  
  
He felt some need of softening that to me:       
"A thousand trees would come to thirty dollars."  
  
Then I was certain I had never meant  
To let him have them. Never show surprise!  
But thirty dollars seemed so small beside  
The extent of pasture I should strip, three cents    
(For that was all they figured out apiece)—   
Three cents so small beside the dollar friends  
I should be writing to within the hour  
Would pay in cities for good trees like those,  
Regular vestry-trees whole Sunday Schools     
Could hang enough on to pick off enough.
  
A thousand Christmas trees I didn't know I had!  
Worth three cents more to give away than sell,  
As may be shown by a simple calculation.  
Too bad I couldn't lay one in a letter.       
I can't help wishing I could send you one,  
In wishing you herewith a Merry Christmas.
 Love has earth to which she clings  
With hills and circling arms about—  
Wall within wall to shut fear out.  
But Thought has need of no such things,  
For Thought has a pair of dauntless wings.
  
On snow and sand and turf, I see  
Where Love has left a printed trace  
With straining in the world’s embrace.  
And such is Love and glad to be.  
But Thought has shaken his ankles free.
  
Thought cleaves the interstellar gloom  
And sits in Sirius’ disc all night,  
Till day makes him retrace his flight,  
With smell of burning on every plume,  
Back past the sun to an earthly room.
  
His gains in heaven are what they are.  
Yet some say Love by being thrall  
And simply staying possesses all  
In several beauty that Thought fares far  
To find fused in another star. 

 The line-storm clouds fly tattered and swift,  
  The road is forlorn all day,  
Where a myriad snowy quartz stones lift,  
  And the hoof-prints vanish away.  
The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee,
  Expend their bloom in vain.  
Come over the hills and far with me,  
  And be my love in the rain.  
  
The birds have less to say for themselves  
  In the wood-world’s torn despair
Than now these numberless years the elves,  
  Although they are no less there:  
All song of the woods is crushed like some  
  Wild, easily shattered rose.  
Come, be my love in the wet woods; come,
  Where the boughs rain when it blows.  
  
There is the gale to urge behind  
  And bruit our singing down,  
And the shallow waters aflutter with wind  
  From which to gather your gown.     
What matter if we go clear to the west,  
  And come not through dry-shod?  
For wilding brooch shall wet your breast  
  The rain-fresh goldenrod.  
  
Oh, never this whelming east wind swells    
  But it seems like the sea’s return  
To the ancient lands where it left the shells  
  Before the age of the fern;  
And it seems like the time when after doubt  
  Our love came back amain.       
Oh, come forth into the storm and rout  
  And be my love in the rain. 

 My long two-pointed ladder's sticking through a tree
Toward heaven still,
And there's a barrel that I didn't fill
Beside it, and there may be two or three
Apples I didn't pick upon some bough.
But I am done with apple-picking now.
Essence of winter sleep is on the night,
The scent of apples: I am drowsing off.
I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight
I got from looking through a pane of glass
I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough
And held against the world of hoary grass.
It melted, and I let it fall and break.
But I was well
Upon my way to sleep before it fell,
And I could tell
What form my dreaming was about to take.
Magnified apples appear and disappear,
Stem end and blossom end,
And every fleck of russet showing clear.
My instep arch not only keeps the ache,
It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round.
I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend.
And I keep hearing from the cellar bin
The rumbling sound
Of load on load of apples coming in.
For I have had too much
Of apple-picking: I am overtired
Of the great harvest I myself desired.
There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch,
Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall.
For all
That struck the earth,
No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble,
Went surely to the cider-apple heap
As of no worth.
One can see what will trouble
This sleep of mine, whatever sleep it is.
Were he not gone,
The woodchuck could say whether it's like his
Long sleep, as I describe its coming on,
Or just some human sleep.
 The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yardAnd made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of wood,Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.And from there those that lifted eyes could countFive mountain ranges one behind the otherUnder the sunset far into Vermont.And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled,As it ran light, or had to bear a load.And nothing happened: day was all but done.Call it a day, I wish they might have saidTo please the boy by giving him the half hourThat a boy counts so much when saved from work.His sister stood beside them in her apronTo tell them "Supper." At the word, the saw,As if to prove saws knew what supper meant,Leaped out at the boy's hand, or seemed to leap—He must have given the hand. However it was,Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!The boy's first outcry was a rueful laugh,As he swung toward them holding up the handHalf in appeal, but half as if to keepThe life from spilling. Then the boy saw all—Since he was old enough to know, big boyDoing a man's work, though a child at heart—He saw all spoiled. "Don't let him cut my hand off—The doctor, when he comes. Don't let him, sister!"So. But the hand was gone already.The doctor put him in the dark of ether.He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.And then—the watcher at his pulse took fright.No one believed. They listened at his heart.Little—less—nothing!—and that ended it.No more to build on there. And they, since theyWere not the one dead, turned to their affairs.  Others taunt me with having knelt at well-curbs
Always wrong to the light, so never seeing
Deeper down in the well than where the water
Gives me back in a shining surface picture
Me myself in the summer heaven godlike
Looking out of a wreath of fern and cloud puffs.
Once, when trying with chin against a well-curb,
I discerned, as I thought, beyond the picture,
Through the picture, a something white, uncertain,
Something more of the depths—and then I lost it.
Water came to rebuke the too clear water.
One drop fell from a fern, and lo, a ripple
Shook whatever it was lay there at bottom,
Blurred it, blotted it out. What was that whiteness?
Truth? A pebble of quartz? For once, then, something.
 There was never a sound beside the wood but one,
And that was my long scythe whispering to the ground.
What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself;
Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun,
Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound—
And that was why it whispered and did not speak.
It was no dream of the gift of idle hours,
Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf:
Anything more than the truth would have seemed too weak
To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows,
Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers
(Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake.
The fact is the sweetest dream that labor knows.
My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make.
 "You ought to have seen what I saw on my way  
To the village, through Mortenson's pasture to-day:  
Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb,  
Real sky-blue, and heavy, and ready to drum  
In the cavernous pail of the first one to come!          
And all ripe together, not some of them green  
And some of them ripe! You ought to have seen!"  
  
"I don't know what part of the pasture you mean."  
  
"You know where they cut off the woods—let me see—  
It was two years ago—or no!—can it be          
No longer than that?—and the following fall  
The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall."  
  
"Why, there hasn't been time for the bushes to grow.  
That's always the way with the blueberries, though:  
There may not have been the ghost of a sign          
Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine,  
But get the pine out of the way, you may burn  
The pasture all over until not a fern  
Or grass-blade is left, not to mention a stick,  
And presto, they're up all around you as thick          
And hard to explain as a conjuror's trick."  
  
"It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit.  
I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot.  
And after all really they're ebony skinned:  
The blue's but a mist from the breath of the wind,          
A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand,  
And less than the tan with which pickers are tanned."  
  
"Does Mortenson know what he has, do you think?"  
  
"He may and not care and so leave the chewink  
To gather them for him—you know what he is.          
He won't make the fact that they're rightfully his  
An excuse for keeping us other folk out."  
  
"I wonder you didn't see Loren about."  
  
"The best of it was that I did. Do you know,  
I was just getting through what the field had to show          
And over the wall and into the road,  
When who should come by, with a democrat-load  
Of all the young chattering Lorens alive,  
But Loren, the fatherly, out for a drive."  
  
"He saw you, then? What did he do? Did he frown?"          
  
"He just kept nodding his head up and down.  
You know how politely he always goes by.  
But he thought a big thought—I could tell by his eye—  
Which being expressed, might be this in effect:  
'I have left those there berries, I shrewdly suspect,          
To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame.'"  
  
"He's a thriftier person than some I could name."  
  
"He seems to be thrifty; and hasn't he need,  
With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed?  
He has brought them all up on wild berries, they say,          
Like birds. They store a great many away.  
They eat them the year round, and those they don't eat  
They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet."  
  
"Who cares what they say? It's a nice way to live,  
Just taking what Nature is willing to give,          
Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow."  
  
"I wish you had seen his perpetual bow—  
And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them turned,  
And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned."  
  
"I wish I knew half what the flock of them know          
Of where all the berries and other things grow,  
Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top  
Of the boulder-strewn mountain, and when they will crop.  
I met them one day and each had a flower  
Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower;          
Some strange kind—they told me it hadn't a name."  
  
"I've told you how once not long after we came,  
I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth  
By going to him of all people on earth  
To ask if he knew any fruit to be had          
For the picking. The rascal, he said he'd be glad  
To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad.  
There had been some berries—but those were all gone.  
He didn't say where they had been. He went on:  
'I'm sure—I'm sure'—as polite as could be.          
He spoke to his wife in the door, 'Let me see,  
Mame, we don't know any good berrying place?'  
It was all he could do to keep a straight face.  
  
"If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him,  
He'll find he's mistaken. See here, for a whim,          
We'll pick in the Mortensons' pasture this year.  
We'll go in the morning, that is, if it's clear,  
And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be wet.  
It's so long since I picked I almost forget  
How we used to pick berries: we took one look round,          
Then sank out of sight like trolls underground,  
And saw nothing more of each other, or heard,  
Unless when you said I was keeping a bird  
Away from its nest, and I said it was you.  
'Well, one of us is.' For complaining it flew          
Around and around us. And then for a while  
We picked, till I feared you had wandered a mile,  
And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout  
Too loud for the distance you were, it turned out,  
For when you made answer, your voice was as low          
As talking—you stood up beside me, you know."  
  
"We sha'n't have the place to ourselves to enjoy—  
Not likely, when all the young Lorens deploy.  
They'll be there to-morrow, or even to-night.  
They won't be too friendly—they may be polite—          
To people they look on as having no right  
To pick where they're picking. But we won't complain.  
You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain,  
The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves,  
Like two kinds of jewels, a vision for thieves."
 O hushed October morning mild,	
Thy leaves have ripened to the fall;	
To-morrow's wind, if it be wild,	
Should waste them all.	
The crows above the forest call;	        
To-morrow they may form and go.	
O hushed October morning mild,	
Begin the hours of this day slow,	
Make the day seem to us less brief.	
Hearts not averse to being beguiled,	        
Beguile us in the way you know;	
Release one leaf at break of day;	
At noon release another leaf;	
One from our trees, one far away;	
Retard the sun with gentle mist;	        
Enchant the land with amethyst.	
Slow, slow!	
For the grapes' sake, if they were all,	
Whose leaves already are burnt with frost,	
Whose clustered fruit must else be lost—	        
For the grapes' sake along the wall.
 I'm going out to clean the pasture spring;  
I'll only stop to rake the leaves away  
(And wait to watch the water clear, I may):  
I sha'n't be gone long.—You come too.  
  
I'm going out to fetch the little calf
That's standing by the mother. It's so young,  
It totters when she licks it with her tongue.  
I sha'n't be gone long.—You come too.
 I wonder about the trees.  
Why do we wish to bear  
Forever the noise of these  
More than another noise  
So close to our dwelling place? 
We suffer them by the day  
Till we lose all measure of pace,  
And fixity in our joys,  
And acquire a listening air.  
They are that that talks of going       
But never gets away;  
And that talks no less for knowing,  
As it grows wiser and older,  
That now it means to stay.  
My feet tug at the floor 
And my head sways to my shoulder  
Sometimes when I watch trees sway,  
From the window or the door.  
I shall set forth for somewhere,  
I shall make the reckless choice 
Some day when they are in voice  
And tossing so as to scare  
The white clouds over them on.  
I shall have less to say,  
But I shall be gone.
 All out of doors looked darkly in at him
Through the thin frost, almost in separate stars,
That gathers on the pane in empty rooms.
What kept his eyes from giving back the gaze
Was the lamp tilted near them in his hand.
What kept him from remembering what it was
That brought him to that creaking room was age.
He stood with barrels round him—at a loss.
And having scared the cellar under him
In clomping there, he scared it once again
In clomping off;—and scared the outer night,
Which has its sounds, familiar, like the roar
Of trees and crack of branches, common things,
But nothing so like beating on a box.
A light he was to no one but himself
Where now he sat, concerned with he knew what,
A quiet light, and then not even that.
He consigned to the moon,—such as she was,
So late-arising,—to the broken moon
As better than the sun in any case
For such a charge, his snow upon the roof,
His icicles along the wall to keep;
And slept. The log that shifted with a jolt
Once in the stove, disturbed him and he shifted,
And eased his heavy breathing, but still slept.
One aged man—one man—can't fill a house,
A farm, a countryside, or if he can,
It's thus he does it of a winter night.
 The way a crow
Shook down on me
The dust of snow
From a hemlock tree

Has given my heart
A change of mood
And saved some part
Of a day I had rued.
 I dwell in a lonely house I know 
That vanished many a summer ago, 
   And left no trace but the cellar walls, 
   And a cellar in which the daylight falls 
And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. 

O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield 
The woods come back to the mowing field; 
   The orchard tree has grown one copse 
   Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; 
The footpath down to the well is healed. 

I dwell with a strangely aching heart 
In that vanished abode there far apart 
   On that disused and forgotten road 
   That has no dust-bath now for the toad. 
Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; 

The whippoorwill is coming to shout 
And hush and cluck and flutter about: 
   I hear him begin far enough away 
   Full many a time to say his say 
Before he arrives to say it out. 

It is under the small, dim, summer star. 
I know not who these mute folk are 
   Who share the unlit place with me—
   Those stones out under the low-limbed tree 
Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. 

They are tireless folk, but slow and sad—
Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,—
   With none among them that ever sings, 
   And yet, in view of how many things, 
As sweet companions as might be had.
 Out through the fields and the woods   And over the walls I have wended;I have climbed the hills of view   And looked at the world, and descended;I have come by the highway home,   And lo, it is ended.The leaves are all dead on the ground,   Save those that the oak is keepingTo ravel them one by one   And let them go scraping and creepingOut over the crusted snow,   When others are sleeping.And the dead leaves lie huddled and still,   No longer blown hither and thither;The last lone aster is gone;   The flowers of the witch hazel wither;The heart is still aching to seek,   But the feet question ‘Whither?’Ah, when to the heart of man   Was it ever less than a treasonTo go with the drift of things,   To yield with a grace to reason,And bow and accept the end   Of a love or a season?  There is a singer everyone has heard,
Loud, a mid-summer and a mid-wood bird,
Who makes the solid tree trunks sound again.
He says that leaves are old and that for flowers
Mid-summer is to spring as one to ten.
He says the early petal-fall is past
When pear and cherry bloom went down in showers
On sunny days a moment overcast;
And comes that other fall we name the fall.
He says the highway dust is over all.
The bird would cease and be as other birds
But that he knows in singing not to sing.
The question that he frames in all but words
Is what to make of a diminished thing.
 Here come the line-gang pioneering by.They throw a forest down less cut than broken.They plant dead trees for living, and the deadThey string together with a living thread.They string an instrument against the skyWherein words whether beaten out or spokenWill run as hushed as when they were a thoughtBut in no hush they string it: they go pastWith shouts afar to pull the cable taut,To hold it hard until they make it fast,To ease away—they have it. With a laugh,An oath of towns that set the wild at naughtThey bring the telephone and telegraph.  Come with rain, O loud Southwester!Bring the singer, bring the nester;Give the buried flower a dream;Make the settled snowbank steam;Find the brown beneath the white;But whate’er you do tonight,Bathe my window, make it flow,Melt it as the ice will go;Melt the glass and leave the sticksLike a hermit’s crucifix;Burst into my narrow stall;Swing the picture on the wall;Run the rattling pages o’er;Scatter poems on the floor;Turn the poet out of door.  If tired of trees I seek again mankind,    Well I know where to hie me—in the dawn,    To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn.There amid lolling juniper reclined,Myself unseen, I see in white defined    Far off the homes of men, and farther still    The graves of men on an opposing hill,Living or dead, whichever are to mind.And if by noon I have too much of these,    I have but to turn on my arm, and lo,    The sunburned hillside sets my face aglow,My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze,    I smell the earth, I smell the bruisèd plant,    I look into the crater of the ant.   You come to fetch me from my work to-night When supper's on the table, and we'll see If I can leave off burying the white Soft petals fallen from the apple tree. (Soft petals, yes, but not so barren quite, Mingled with these, smooth bean and wrinkled pea;) And go along with you ere you lose sight Of what you came for and become like me, Slave to a springtime passion for the earth. How Love burns through the Putting in the Seed On through the watching for that early birth When, just as the soil tarnishes with weed, The sturdy seedling with arched body comes Shouldering its way and shedding the earth crumbs.   The house had gone to bring again To the midnight sky a sunset glow. Now the chimney was all of the house that stood, Like a pistil after the petals go. The barn opposed across the way, That would have joined the house in flame Had it been the will of the wind, was left To bear forsaken the place’s name. No more it opened with all one end For teams that came by the stony road To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs And brush the mow with the summer load. The birds that came to it through the air At broken windows flew out and in, Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh From too much dwelling on what has been. Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf, And the aged elm, though touched with fire; And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm; And the fence post carried a strand of wire. For them there was really nothing sad. But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept, One had to be versed in country things Not to believe the phoebes wept.   I’m going out to clean the pasture spring;I’ll only stop to rake the leaves away(And wait to watch the water clear, I may):I sha’n’t be gone long.—You come too.I’m going out to fetch the little calfThat’s standing by the mother. It’s so young,It totters when she licks it with her tongue.I sha’n’t be gone long.—You come too.   “When I was just as far as I could walkFrom here to-day,There was an hourAll stillWhen leaning with my head against a flowerI heard you talk.Don’t say I didn’t, for I heard you say—You spoke from that flower on the window sill—Do you remember what it was you said?”“First tell me what it was you thought you heard.”“Having found the flower and driven a bee away,I leaned my head,And holding by the stalk,I listened and I thought I caught the word—What was it? Did you call me by my name?Or did you say—Someone said ‘Come’—I heard it as I bowed.”“I may have thought as much, but not aloud.”“Well, so I came.”  I had for my winter evening walk—No one at all with whom to talk,But I had the cottages in a rowUp to their shining eyes in snow.And I thought I had the folk within:I had the sound of a violin;I had a glimpse through curtain lacesOf youthful forms and youthful faces.I had such company outward bound.I went till there were no cottages found.I turned and repented, but coming backI saw no window but that was black.Over the snow my creaking feetDisturbed the slumbering village streetLike profanation, by your leave,At ten o’clock of a winter eve.   I walked down alone Sunday after church   To the place where John has been cutting treesTo see for myself about the birch   He said I could have to bush my peas.The sun in the new-cut narrow gap   Was hot enough for the first of May,And stifling hot with the odor of sap   From stumps still bleeding their life away.The frogs that were peeping a thousand shrill   Wherever the ground was low and wet,The minute they heard my step went still   To watch me and see what I came to get.Birch boughs enough piled everywhere!—   All fresh and sound from the recent axe.Time someone came with cart and pair   And got them off the wild flower’s backs.They might be good for garden things   To curl a little finger round,The same as you seize cat’s-cradle strings,   And lift themselves up off the ground.Small good to anything growing wild,   They were crooking many a trilliumThat had budded before the boughs were piled   And since it was coming up had to come.   You were forever finding some new play. So when I saw you down on hands and knees In the meadow, busy with the new-cut hay, Trying, I thought, to set it up on end, I went to show you how to make it stay, If that was your idea, against the breeze, And, if you asked me, even help pretend To make it root again and grow afresh. But 'twas no make-believe with you to-day, Nor was the grass itself your real concern, Though I found your hand full of wilted fern, Steel-bright June-grass, and blackening heads of clover. 'Twas a nest full of young birds on the ground The cutter-bar had just gone champing over (Miraculously without tasting flesh) And left defenseless to the heat and light. You wanted to restore them to their right Of something interposed between their sight And too much world at once—could means be found. The way the nest-full every time we stirred Stood up to us as to a mother-bird Whose coming home has been too long deferred, Made me ask would the mother-bird return And care for them in such a change of scene And might our meddling make her more afraid. That was a thing we could not wait to learn. We saw the risk we took in doing good, But dared not spare to do the best we could Though harm should come of it; so built the screen You had begun, and gave them back their shade. All this to prove we cared. Why is there then No more to tell? We turned to other things. I haven't any memory—have you?—Of ever coming to the place again To see if the birds lived the first night through, And so at last to learn to use their wings.   You were forever finding some new play.
So when I saw you down on hands and knees
In the meadow, busy with the new-cut hay,
Trying, I thought, to set it up on end,
I went to show you how to make it stay,
If that was your idea, against the breeze,
And, if you asked me, even help pretend
To make it root again and grow afresh.
But ’twas no make-believe with you to-day,
Nor was the grass itself your real concern,
Though I found your hand full of wilted fern,
Steel-bright June-grass, and blackening heads of clover.
’Twas a nest full of young birds on the ground
The cutter-bar had just gone champing over
(Miraculously without tasting flesh)
And left defenseless to the heat and light.
You wanted to restore them to their right
Of something interposed between their sight
And too much world at once—could means be found.
The way the nest-full every time we stirred
Stood up to us as to a mother-bird
Whose coming home has been too long deferred,
Made me ask would the mother-bird return
And care for them in such a change of scene
And might our meddling make her more afraid.
That was a thing we could not wait to learn.
We saw the risk we took in doing good,
But dared not spare to do the best we could
Though harm should come of it; so built the screen
You had begun, and gave them back their shade.
All this to prove we cared. Why is there then
No more to tell? We turned to other things.
I haven’t any memory—have you?—
Of ever coming to the place again
To see if the birds lived the first night through,
And so at last to learn to use their wings.
 Out walking in the frozen swamp one grey day I paused and said, "I will turn back from here. No, I will go on farther—and we shall see." The hard snow held me, save where now and then One foot went down. The view was all in lines Straight up and down of tall slim trees Too much alike to mark or name a place by So as to say for certain I was here Or somewhere else: I was just far from home. A small bird flew before me. He was careful To put a tree between us when he lighted, And say no word to tell me who he was Who was so foolish as to think what he thought. He thought that I was after him for a feather—The white one in his tail; like one who takes Everything said as personal to himself. One flight out sideways would have undeceived him. And then there was a pile of wood for which I forgot him and let his little fear Carry him off the way I might have gone, Without so much as wishing him good-night. He went behind it to make his last stand. It was a cord of maple, cut and split And piled—and measured, four by four by eight. And not another like it could I see. No runner tracks in this year's snow looped near it. And it was older sure than this year's cutting, Or even last year's or the year's before. The wood was grey and the bark warping off it And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle. What held it though on one side was a tree Still growing, and on one a stake and prop, These latter about to fall. I thought that only Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks Could so forget his handiwork on which He spent himself, the labour of his axe, And leave it there far from a useful fireplace To warm the frozen swamp as best it could With the slow smokeless burning of decay.  There were three in the meadow by the brookGathering up windrows, piling cocks of hay,With an eye always lifted toward the westWhere an irregular sun-bordered cloudDarkly advanced with a perpetual daggerFlickering across its bosom. SuddenlyOne helper, thrusting pitchfork in the ground,Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed.The town-bred farmer failed to understand.“What is there wrong?”“Something you just now said.”“What did I say?”“About our taking pains.”“To cock the hay?—because it’s going to shower?I said that more than half an hour ago.I said it to myself as much as you.”“You didn’t know. But James is one big fool.He thought you meant to find fault with his work.That’s what the average farmer would have meant.James would take time, of course, to chew it overBefore he acted: he’s just got round to act.”“He is a fool if that’s the way he takes me.”“Don’t let it bother you. You’ve found out something.The hand that knows his business won’t be toldTo do work better or faster—those two things.I’m as particular as anyone:Most likely I’d have served you just the same.But I know you don’t understand our ways.You were just talking what was in your mind,What was in all our minds, and you weren’t hinting.Tell you a story of what happened once:I was up here in Salem at a man’sNamed Sanders with a gang of four or fiveDoing the haying. No one liked the boss.He was one of the kind sports call a spider,All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavyFrom a humped body nigh as big’s a biscuit.But work! that man could work, especiallyIf by so doing he could get more workOut of his hired help. I’m not denyingHe was hard on himself. I couldn’t findThat he kept any hours—not for himself.Daylight and lantern-light were one to him:I’ve heard him pounding in the barn all night.But what he liked was someone to encourage.Them that he couldn’t lead he’d get behindAnd drive, the way you can, you know, in mowing—Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs off.I’d seen about enough of his bulling tricks(We call that bulling). I’d been watching him.So when he paired off with me in the hayfieldTo load the load, thinks I, Look out for trouble.I built the load and topped it off; old SandersCombed it down with a rake and says, ‘O. K.’Everything went well till we reached the barnWith a big catch to empty in a bay.You understand that meant the easy jobFor the man up on top of throwing downThe hay and rolling it off wholesale,Where on a mow it would have been slow lifting.You wouldn’t think a fellow’d need much urgingUnder these circumstances, would you now?But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands,And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit,Shouts like an army captain, ‘Let her come!’Thinks I, D’ye mean it? ‘What was that you said?’I asked out loud, so’s there’d be no mistake,‘Did you say, Let her come?’ ‘Yes, let her come.’He said it over, but he said it softer.Never you say a thing like that to a man,Not if he values what he is. God, I’d as soonMurdered him as left out his middle name.I’d built the load and knew right where to find it.Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round forLike meditating, and then I just dug inAnd dumped the rackful on him in ten lots.I looked over the side once in the dustAnd caught sight of him treading-water-like,Keeping his head above. ‘Damn ye,’ I says,‘That gets ye!’ He squeaked like a squeezed rat.That was the last I saw or heard of him.I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off.As I sat mopping hayseed from my neck,And sort of waiting to be asked about it,One of the boys sings out, ‘Where’s the old man?’‘I left him in the barn under the hay.If ye want him, ye can go and dig him out.’They realized from the way I swobbed my neckMore than was needed something must be up.They headed for the barn; I stayed where I was.They told me afterward. First they forked hay,A lot of it, out into the barn floor.Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle.I guess they thought I’d spiked him in the templeBefore I buried him, or I couldn’t have managed.They excavated more. ‘Go keep his wifeOut of the barn.’ Someone looked in a window,And curse me if he wasn’t in the kitchenSlumped way down in a chair, with both his feetStuck in the oven, the hottest day that summer.He looked so clean disgusted from behindThere was no one that dared to stir him up,Or let him know that he was being looked at.Apparently I hadn’t buried him(I may have knocked him down); but my just tryingTo bury him had hurt his dignity.He had gone to the house so’s not to meet me.He kept away from us all afternoon.We tended to his hay. We saw him outAfter a while picking peas in his garden:He couldn’t keep away from doing something.”“Weren’t you relieved to find he wasn’t dead?”“No! and yet I don’t know—it’s hard to say.I went about to kill him fair enough.”“You took an awkward way. Did he discharge you?”“Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right.”  A governor it was proclaimed this time,When all who would come seeking in New HampshireAncestral memories might come together.And those of the name Stark gathered in Bow,A rock-strewn town where farming has fallen off,And sprout-lands flourish where the axe has gone.Someone had literally run to earthIn an old cellar hole in a by-roadThe origin of all the family there.Thence they were sprung, so numerous a tribeThat now not all the houses left in townMade shift to shelter them without the helpOf here and there a tent in grove and orchard.They were at Bow, but that was not enough:Nothing would do but they must fix a dayTo stand together on the crater’s vergeThat turned them on the world, and try to fathomThe past and get some strangeness out of it.But rain spoiled all. The day began uncertain,With clouds low trailing and moments of rain that misted.The young folk held some hope out to each otherTill well toward noon when the storm settled downWith a swish in the grass. “What if the othersAre there,” they said. “It isn’t going to rain.”Only one from a farm not far awayStrolled thither, not expecting he would findAnyone else, but out of idleness.One, and one other, yes, for there were two.The second round the curving hillside roadWas a girl; and she halted some way offTo reconnoitre, and then made up her mindAt least to pass by and see who he was,And perhaps hear some word about the weather.This was some Stark she didn’t know. He nodded.“No fête to-day,” he said.“It looks that way.”She swept the heavens, turning on her heel.“I only idled down.”“I idled down.”Provision there had been for just such meetingOf stranger cousins, in a family treeDrawn on a sort of passport with the branchOf the one bearing it done in detail—Some zealous one’s laborious device.She made a sudden movement toward her bodice,As one who clasps her heart. They laughed together.“Stark?” he inquired. “No matter for the proof.”“Yes, Stark. And you?”“I’m Stark.” He drew his passport.“You know we might not be and still be cousins:The town is full of Chases, Lowes, and Baileys,All claiming some priority in Starkness.My mother was a Lane, yet might have marriedAnyone upon earth and still her childrenWould have been Starks, and doubtless here to-day.”“You riddle with your genealogyLike a Viola. I don’t follow you.”“I only mean my mother was a StarkSeveral times over, and by marrying fatherNo more than brought us back into the name.”“One ought not to be thrown into confusionBy a plain statement of relationship,But I own what you say makes my head spin.You take my card—you seem so good at such things—And see if you can reckon our cousinship.Why not take seats here on the cellar wallAnd dangle feet among the raspberry vines?”“Under the shelter of the family tree.”“Just so—that ought to be enough protection.”“Not from the rain. I think it’s going to rain.”“It’s raining.”“No, it’s misting; let’s be fair.Does the rain seem to you to cool the eyes?”The situation was like this: the roadBowed outward on the mountain half-way up,And disappeared and ended not far off.No one went home that way. The only houseBeyond where they were was a shattered seedpod.And below roared a brook hidden in trees,The sound of which was silence for the place.This he sat listening to till she gave judgment.“On father’s side, it seems, we’re—let me see——”“Don’t be too technical.—You have three cards.”“Four cards, one yours, three mine, one for each branchOf the Stark family I’m a member of.”“D’you know a person so related to herselfIs supposed to be mad.”“I may be mad.”“You look so, sitting out here in the rainStudying genealogy with meYou never saw before. What will we come toWith all this pride of ancestry, we Yankees?I think we’re all mad. Tell me why we’re hereDrawn into town about this cellar holeLike wild geese on a lake before a storm?What do we see in such a hole, I wonder.”“The Indians had a myth of Chicamoztoc,Which means The Seven Caves that We Came out of.This is the pit from which we Starks were digged.”“You must be learned. That’s what you see in it?”“And what do you see?”“Yes, what do I see?First let me look. I see raspberry vines—”“Oh, if you’re going to use your eyes, just hearWhat I see. It’s a little, little boy,As pale and dim as a match flame in the sun;He’s groping in the cellar after jam,He thinks it’s dark and it’s flooded with daylight.”“He’s nothing. Listen. When I lean like thisI can make out old Grandsir Stark distinctly,—With his pipe in his mouth and his brown jug—Bless you, it isn’t Grandsir Stark, it’s Granny,But the pipe’s there and smoking and the jug.She’s after cider, the old girl, she’s thirsty;Here’s hoping she gets her drink and gets out safely.”“Tell me about her. Does she look like me?”“She should, shouldn’t she, you’re so many timesOver descended from her. I believeShe does look like you. Stay the way you are.The nose is just the same, and so’s the chin—Making allowance, making due allowance.”“You poor, dear, great, great, great, great Granny!”“See that you get her greatness right. Don’t stint her.”“Yes, it’s important, though you think it isn’t.I won’t be teased. But see how wet I am.”“Yes, you must go; we can’t stay here for ever.But wait until I give you a hand up.A bead of silver water more or lessStrung on your hair won’t hurt your summer looks.I wanted to try something with the noiseThat the brook raises in the empty valley.We have seen visions—now consult the voices.Something I must have learned riding in trainsWhen I was young. I used the roarTo set the voices speaking out of it,Speaking or singing, and the band-music playing.Perhaps you have the art of what I mean.I’ve never listened in among the soundsThat a brook makes in such a wild descent.It ought to give a purer oracle.”“It’s as you throw a picture on a screen:The meaning of it all is out of you;The voices give you what you wish to hear.”“Strangely, it’s anything they wish to give.”“Then I don’t know. It must be strange enough.I wonder if it’s not your make-believe.What do you think you’re like to hear to-day?”“From the sense of our having been together—But why take time for what I’m like to hear?I’ll tell you what the voices really say.You will do very well right where you areA little longer. I mustn’t feel too hurried,Or I can’t give myself to hear the voices.”“Is this some trance you are withdrawing into?”“You must be very still; you mustn’t talk.”“I’ll hardly breathe.”“The voices seem to say——”“I’m waiting.”“Don’t! The voices seem to say:Call her Nausicaa, the unafraidOf an acquaintance made adventurously.”“I let you say that—on consideration.”“I don’t see very well how you can help it.You want the truth. I speak but by the voices.You see they know I haven’t had your name,Though what a name should matter between us——”“I shall suspect——”“Be good. The voices say:Call her Nausicaa, and take a timberThat you shall find lies in the cellar charredAmong the raspberries, and hew and shape itFor a door-sill or other corner pieceIn a new cottage on the ancient spot.The life is not yet all gone out of it.And come and make your summer dwelling here,And perhaps she will come, still unafraid,And sit before you in the open doorWith flowers in her lap until they fade,But not come in across the sacred sill——”“I wonder where your oracle is tending.You can see that there’s something wrong with it,Or it would speak in dialect. Whose voiceDoes it purport to speak in? Not old Grandsir’sNor Granny’s, surely. Call up one of them.They have best right to be heard in this place.”“You seem so partial to our great-grandmother(Nine times removed. Correct me if I err.)You will be likely to regard as sacredAnything she may say. But let me warn you,Folks in her day were given to plain speaking.You think you’d best tempt her at such a time?”“It rests with us always to cut her off.”“Well then, it’s Granny speaking: ‘I dunnow!Mebbe I’m wrong to take it as I do.There ain’t no names quite like the old ones though,Nor never will be to my way of thinking.One mustn’t bear too hard on the new comers,But there’s a dite too many of them for comfort.I should feel easier if I could seeMore of the salt wherewith they’re to be salted.Son, you do as you’re told! You take the timber—It’s as sound as the day when it was cut—And begin over——’ There, she’d better stop.You can see what is troubling Granny, though.But don’t you think we sometimes make too muchOf the old stock? What counts is the ideals,And those will bear some keeping still about.”“I can see we are going to be good friends.”“I like your ‘going to be.’ You said just nowIt’s going to rain.”“I know, and it was raining.I let you say all that. But I must go now.”“You let me say it? on consideration?How shall we say good-bye in such a case?”“How shall we?”“Will you leave the way to me?”“No, I don’t trust your eyes. You’ve said enough.Now give me your hand up.—Pick me that flower.”“Where shall we meet again?”“Nowhere but hereOnce more before we meet elsewhere.”“In rain?”“It ought to be in rain. Sometime in rain.In rain to-morrow, shall we, if it rains?But if we must, in sunshine.” So she went.   Let myself in at the kitchen door.“It’s you,” she said. “I can’t get up. Forgive meNot answering your knock. I can no moreLet people in than I can keep them out.I’m getting too old for my size, I tell them.My fingers are about all I’ve the use ofSo’s to take any comfort. I can sew:I help out with this beadwork what I can.”“That’s a smart pair of pumps you’re beading there.Who are they for?”“You mean?—oh, for some miss.I can’t keep track of other people’s daughters.Lord, if I were to dream of everyoneWhose shoes I primped to dance in!”“And where’s John?”“Haven’t you seen him? Strange what set you offTo come to his house when he’s gone to yours.You can’t have passed each other. I know what:He must have changed his mind and gone to Garlands.He won’t be long in that case. You can wait.Though what good you can be, or anyone—It’s gone so far. You’ve heard? Estelle’s run off.”“Yes, what’s it all about? When did she go?”“Two weeks since.”“She’s in earnest, it appears.”“I’m sure she won’t come back. She’s hiding somewhere.I don’t know where myself. John thinks I do.He thinks I only have to say the word,And she’ll come back. But, bless you, I’m her mother—I can’t talk to her, and, Lord, if I could!”“It will go hard with John. What will he do?He can’t find anyone to take her place.”“Oh, if you ask me that, what will he do?He gets some sort of bakeshop meals together,With me to sit and tell him everything,What’s wanted and how much and where it is.But when I’m gone—of course I can’t stay here:Estelle’s to take me when she’s settled down.He and I only hinder one another.I tell them they can’t get me through the door, though:I’ve been built in here like a big church organ.We’ve been here fifteen years.”“That’s a long timeTo live together and then pull apart.How do you see him living when you’re gone?Two of you out will leave an empty house.”“I don’t just see him living many years,Left here with nothing but the furniture.I hate to think of the old place when we’re gone,With the brook going by below the yard,And no one here but hens blowing about.If he could sell the place, but then, he can’t:No one will ever live on it again.It’s too run down. This is the last of it.What I think he will do, is let things smash.He’ll sort of swear the time away. He’s awful!I never saw a man let family troublesMake so much difference in his man’s affairs.He’s just dropped everything. He’s like a child.I blame his being brought up by his mother.He’s got hay down that’s been rained on three times.He hoed a little yesterday for me:I thought the growing things would do him good.Something went wrong. I saw him throw the hoeSky-high with both hands. I can see it now—Come here—I’ll show you—in that apple tree.That’s no way for a man to do at his age:He’s fifty-five, you know, if he’s a day.”“Aren’t you afraid of him? What’s that gun for?”“Oh, that’s been there for hawks since chicken-time.John Hall touch me! Not if he knows his friends.I’ll say that for him, John’s no threatenerLike some men folk. No one’s afraid of him;All is, he’s made up his mind not to standWhat he has got to stand.”“Where is Estelle?Couldn’t one talk to her? What does she say?You say you don’t know where she is.”“Nor want to!She thinks if it was bad to live with him,It must be right to leave him.”“Which is wrong!”“Yes, but he should have married her.”“I know.”“The strain’s been too much for her all these years:I can’t explain it any other way.It’s different with a man, at least with John:He knows he’s kinder than the run of men.Better than married ought to be as goodAs married—that’s what he has always said.I know the way he’s felt—but all the same!”“I wonder why he doesn’t marry herAnd end it.”“Too late now: she wouldn’t have him.He’s given her time to think of something else.That’s his mistake. The dear knows my interestHas been to keep the thing from breaking up.This is a good home: I don’t ask for better.But when I’ve said, ‘Why shouldn’t they be married,’He’d say, ‘Why should they?’ no more words than that.”“And after all why should they? John’s been fairI take it. What was his was always hers.There was no quarrel about property.”“Reason enough, there was no property.A friend or two as good as own the farm,Such as it is. It isn’t worth the mortgage.”“I mean Estelle has always held the purse.”“The rights of that are harder to get at.I guess Estelle and I have filled the purse.’Twas we let him have money, not he us.John’s a bad farmer. I’m not blaming him.Take it year in, year out, he doesn’t make much.We came here for a home for me, you know,Estelle to do the housework for the boardOf both of us. But look how it turns out:She seems to have the housework, and besides,Half of the outdoor work, though as for that,He’d say she does it more because she likes it.You see our pretty things are all outdoors.Our hens and cows and pigs are always betterThan folks like us have any business with.Farmers around twice as well off as weHaven’t as good. They don’t go with the farm.One thing you can’t help liking about John,He’s fond of nice things—too fond, some would say.But Estelle don’t complain: she’s like him there.She wants our hens to be the best there are.You never saw this room before a show,Full of lank, shivery, half-drowned birdsIn separate coops, having their plumage done.The smell of the wet feathers in the heat!You spoke of John’s not being safe to stay with.You don’t know what a gentle lot we are:We wouldn’t hurt a hen! You ought to see usMoving a flock of hens from place to place.We’re not allowed to take them upside down,All we can hold together by the legs.Two at a time’s the rule, one on each arm,No matter how far and how many timesWe have to go.”“You mean that’s John’s idea.”“And we live up to it; or I don’t knowWhat childishness he wouldn’t give way to.He manages to keep the upper handOn his own farm. He’s boss. But as to hens:We fence our flowers in and the hens range.Nothing’s too good for them. We say it pays.John likes to tell the offers he has had,Twenty for this cock, twenty-five for that.He never takes the money. If they’re worthThat much to sell, they’re worth as much to keep.Bless you, it’s all expense, though. Reach me downThe little tin box on the cupboard shelf,The upper shelf, the tin box. That’s the one.I’ll show you. Here you are.”“What’s this?”“A bill—For fifty dollars for one Langshang cock—Receipted. And the cock is in the yard.”“Not in a glass case, then?”“He’d need a tall one:He can eat off a barrel from the ground.He’s been in a glass case, as you may say,The Crystal Palace, London. He’s imported.John bought him, and we paid the bill with beads—Wampum, I call it. Mind, we don’t complain.But you see, don’t you, we take care of him.”“And like it, too. It makes it all the worse.”“It seems as if. And that’s not all: he’s helplessIn ways that I can hardly tell you of.Sometimes he gets possessed to keep accountsTo see where all the money goes so fast.You know how men will be ridiculous.But it’s just fun the way he gets bedeviled—If he’s untidy now, what will he be——?“It makes it all the worse. You must be blind.”“Estelle’s the one. You needn’t talk to me.”“Can’t you and I get to the root of it?What’s the real trouble? What will satisfy her?”“It’s as I say: she’s turned from him, that’s all.”“But why, when she’s well off? Is it the neighbours,Being cut off from friends?”“We have our friends.That isn’t it. Folks aren’t afraid of us.”“She’s let it worry her. You stood the strain,And you’re her mother.”“But I didn’t always.I didn’t relish it along at first.But I got wonted to it. And besides—John said I was too old to have grandchildren.But what’s the use of talking when it’s done?She won’t come back—it’s worse than that—she can’t.”“Why do you speak like that? What do you know?What do you mean?—she’s done harm to herself?”“I mean she’s married—married someone else.”“Oho, oho!”“You don’t believe me.”“Yes, I do,Only too well. I knew there must be something!So that was what was back. She’s bad, that’s all!”“Bad to get married when she had the chance?”“Nonsense! See what’s she done! But who, who——”“Who’d marry her straight out of such a mess?Say it right out—no matter for her mother.The man was found. I’d better name no names.John himself won’t imagine who he is.”“Then it’s all up. I think I’ll get away.You’ll be expecting John. I pity Estelle;I suppose she deserves some pity, too.You ought to have the kitchen to yourselfTo break it to him. You may have the job.”“You needn’t think you’re going to get away.John’s almost here. I’ve had my eye on someoneComing down Ryan’s Hill. I thought ’twas him.Here he is now. This box! Put it away.And this bill.”“What’s the hurry? He’ll unhitch.”“No, he won’t, either. He’ll just drop the reinsAnd turn Doll out to pasture, rig and all.She won’t get far before the wheels hang upOn something—there’s no harm. See, there he is!My, but he looks as if he must have heard!”John threw the door wide but he didn’t enter.“How are you, neighbour? Just the man I’m after.Isn’t it Hell,” he said. “I want to know.Come out here if you want to hear me talk.I’ll talk to you, old woman, afterward.I’ve got some news that maybe isn’t news.What are they trying to do to me, these two?”“Do go along with him and stop his shouting.”She raised her voice against the closing door:“Who wants to hear your news, you—dreadful fool?”   A lantern light from deeper in the barnShone on a man and woman in the doorAnd threw their lurching shadows on a houseNear by, all dark in every glossy window.A horse’s hoof pawed once the hollow floor,And the back of the gig they stood besideMoved in a little. The man grasped a wheel,The woman spoke out sharply, “Whoa, stand still!”“I saw it just as plain as a white plate,”She said, “as the light on the dashboard ranAlong the bushes at the roadside—a man’s face.You must have seen it too.”“I didn’t see it.Are you sure——”“Yes, I’m sure!”“—it was a face?”“Joel, I’ll have to look. I can’t go in,I can’t, and leave a thing like that unsettled.Doors locked and curtains drawn will make no difference.I always have felt strange when we came homeTo the dark house after so long an absence,And the key rattled loudly into placeSeemed to warn someone to be getting outAt one door as we entered at another.What if I’m right, and someone all the time—Don’t hold my arm!”“I say it’s someone passing.”“You speak as if this were a travelled road.You forget where we are. What is beyondThat he’d be going to or coming fromAt such an hour of night, and on foot too.What was he standing still for in the bushes?”“It’s not so very late—it’s only dark.There’s more in it than you’re inclined to say.Did he look like——?”“He looked like anyone.I’ll never rest to-night unless I know.Give me the lantern.”“You don’t want the lantern.”She pushed past him and got it for herself.“You’re not to come,” she said. “This is my business.If the time’s come to face it, I’m the oneTo put it the right way. He’d never dare—Listen! He kicked a stone. Hear that, hear that!He’s coming towards us. Joel, go in—please.Hark!—I don’t hear him now. But please go in.”“In the first place you can’t make me believe it’s——”“It is—or someone else he’s sent to watch.And now’s the time to have it out with himWhile we know definitely where he is.Let him get off and he’ll be everywhereAround us, looking out of trees and bushesTill I sha’n’t dare to set a foot outdoors.And I can’t stand it. Joel, let me go!”“But it’s nonsense to think he’d care enough.”“You mean you couldn’t understand his caring.Oh, but you see he hadn’t had enough—Joel, I won’t—I won’t—I promise you.We mustn’t say hard things. You mustn’t either.”“I’ll be the one, if anybody goes!But you give him the advantage with this light.What couldn’t he do to us standing here!And if to see was what he wanted, whyHe has seen all there was to see and gone.”He appeared to forget to keep his hold,But advanced with her as she crossed the grass.“What do you want?” she cried to all the dark.She stretched up tall to overlook the lightThat hung in both hands hot against her skirt.“There’s no one; so you’re wrong,” he said.“There is.—What do you want?” she cried, and then herselfWas startled when an answer really came.“Nothing.” It came from well along the road.She reached a hand to Joel for support:The smell of scorching woollen made her faint.“What are you doing round this house at night?”“Nothing.” A pause: there seemed no more to say.And then the voice again: “You seem afraid.I saw by the way you whipped up the horse.I’ll just come forward in the lantern lightAnd let you see.”“Yes, do.—Joel, go back!”She stood her ground against the noisy stepsThat came on, but her body rocked a little.“You see,” the voice said.“Oh.” She looked and looked.“You don’t see—I’ve a child here by the hand.”“What’s a child doing at this time of night——?”“Out walking. Every child should have the memoryOf at least one long-after-bedtime walk.What, son?”“Then I should think you’d try to findSomewhere to walk——”“The highway as it happens—We’re stopping for the fortnight down at Dean’s.”“But if that’s all—Joel—you realize—You won’t think anything. You understand?You understand that we have to be careful.This is a very, very lonely place.Joel!” She spoke as if she couldn’t turn.The swinging lantern lengthened to the ground,It touched, it struck it, clattered and went out.   “Willis, I didn’t want you here to-day:The lawyer’s coming for the company.I’m going to sell my soul, or, rather, feet.Five hundred dollars for the pair, you know.”“With you the feet have nearly been the soul;And if you’re going to sell them to the devil,I want to see you do it. When’s he coming?”“I half suspect you knew, and came on purposeTo try to help me drive a better bargain.”“Well, if it’s true! Yours are no common feet.The lawyer don’t know what it is he’s buying:So many miles you might have walked you won’t walk.You haven’t run your forty orchids down.What does he think?—How are the blessed feet?The doctor’s sure you’re going to walk again?”“He thinks I’ll hobble. It’s both legs and feet.”“They must be terrible—I mean to look at.”“I haven’t dared to look at them uncovered.Through the bed blankets I remind myselfOf a starfish laid out with rigid points.”“The wonder is it hadn’t been your head.”“It’s hard to tell you how I managed it.When I saw the shaft had me by the coat,I didn’t try too long to pull away,Or fumble for my knife to cut away,I just embraced the shaft and rode it out—Till Weiss shut off the water in the wheel-pit.That’s how I think I didn’t lose my head.But my legs got their knocks against the ceiling.”“Awful. Why didn’t they throw off the beltInstead of going clear down in the wheel-pit?”“They say some time was wasted on the belt—Old streak of leather—doesn’t love me muchBecause I make him spit fire at my knuckles,The way Ben Franklin used to make the kite-string.That must be it. Some days he won’t stay on.That day a woman couldn’t coax him off.He’s on his rounds now with his tail in his mouthSnatched right and left across the silver pulleys.Everything goes the same without me there.You can hear the small buzz saws whine, the big sawCaterwaul to the hills around the villageAs they both bite the wood. It’s all our music.One ought as a good villager to like it.No doubt it has a sort of prosperous sound,And it’s our life.”“Yes, when it’s not our death.”“You make that sound as if it wasn’t soWith everything. What we live by we die by.I wonder where my lawyer is. His train’s in.I want this over with; I’m hot and tired.”“You’re getting ready to do something foolish.”“Watch for him, will you, Will? You let him in.I’d rather Mrs. Corbin didn’t know;I’ve boarded here so long, she thinks she owns me.You’re bad enough to manage without her.”“And I’m going to be worse instead of better.You’ve got to tell me how far this is gone:Have you agreed to any price?”“Five hundred.Five hundred—five—five! One, two, three, four, five.You needn’t look at me.”“I don’t believe you.”“I told you, Willis, when you first came in.Don’t you be hard on me. I have to takeWhat I can get. You see they have the feet,Which gives them the advantage in the trade.I can’t get back the feet in any case.”“But your flowers, man, you’re selling out your flowers.”“Yes, that’s one way to put it—all the flowersOf every kind everywhere in this regionFor the next forty summers—call it forty.But I’m not selling those, I’m giving them,They never earned me so much as one cent:Money can’t pay me for the loss of them.No, the five hundred was the sum they namedTo pay the doctor’s bill and tide me over.It’s that or fight, and I don’t want to fight—I just want to get settled in my life,Such as it’s going to be, and know the worst,Or best—it may not be so bad. The firmPromise me all the shooks I want to nail.”“But what about your flora of the valley?”“You have me there. But that—you didn’t thinkThat was worth money to me? Still I ownIt goes against me not to finish itFor the friends it might bring me. By the way,I had a letter from Burroughs—did I tell you?—About my Cyprepedium reginæ;He says it’s not reported so far north.There! there’s the bell. He’s rung. But you go downAnd bring him up, and don’t let Mrs. Corbin.—Oh, well, we’ll soon be through with it. I’m tired.”Willis brought up besides the Boston lawyerA little barefoot girl who in the noiseOf heavy footsteps in the old frame house,And baritone importance of the lawyer,Stood for a while unnoticed with her handsShyly behind her.“Well, and how is Mister——”The lawyer was already in his satchelAs if for papers that might bear the nameHe hadn’t at command. “You must excuse me,I dropped in at the mill and was detained.”“Looking round, I suppose,” said Willis.“Yes,Well, yes.”“Hear anything that might prove useful?”The Broken One saw Anne. “Why, here is Anne.What do you want, dear? Come, stand by the bed;Tell me what is it?” Anne just wagged her dressWith both hands held behind her. “Guess,” she said.“Oh, guess which hand? My my! Once on a timeI knew a lovely way to tell for certainBy looking in the ears. But I forget it.Er, let me see. I think I’ll take the right.That’s sure to be right even if it’s wrong.Come, hold it out. Don’t change.—A Ram’s Horn orchid!A Ram’s Horn! What would I have got, I wonder,If I had chosen left. Hold out the left.Another Ram’s Horn! Where did you find those,Under what beech tree, on what woodchuck’s knoll?”Anne looked at the large lawyer at her side,And thought she wouldn’t venture on so much.“Were there no others?”“There were four or five.I knew you wouldn’t let me pick them all.”“I wouldn’t—so I wouldn’t. You’re the girl!You see Anne has her lesson learned by heart.”“I wanted there should be some there next year.”“Of course you did. You left the rest for seed,And for the backwoods woodchuck. You’re the girl!A Ram’s Horn orchid seedpod for a woodchuckSounds something like. Better than farmer’s beansTo a discriminating appetite,Though the Ram’s Horn is seldom to be hadIn bushel lots—doesn’t come on the market.But, Anne, I’m troubled; have you told me all?You’re hiding something. That’s as bad as lying.You ask this lawyer man. And it’s not safeWith a lawyer at hand to find you out.Nothing is hidden from some people, Anne.You don’t tell me that where you found a Ram’s HornYou didn’t find a Yellow Lady’s Slipper.What did I tell you? What? I’d blush, I would.Don’t you defend yourself. If it was there,Where is it now, the Yellow Lady’s Slipper?”“Well, wait—it’s common—it’s too common.”“Common?The Purple Lady’s Slipper’s commoner.”“I didn’t bring a Purple Lady’s SlipperTo You—to you I mean—they’re both too common.”The lawyer gave a laugh among his papersAs if with some idea that she had scored.“I’ve broken Anne of gathering bouquets.It’s not fair to the child. It can’t be helped though:Pressed into service means pressed out of shape.Somehow I’ll make it right with her—she’ll see.She’s going to do my scouting in the field,Over stone walls and all along a woodAnd by a river bank for water flowers,The floating Heart, with small leaf like a heart,And at the sinus under water a fistOf little fingers all kept down but one,And that thrust up to blossom in the sunAs if to say, ‘You! You’re the Heart’s desire.’Anne has a way with flowers to take the placeOf that she’s lost: she goes down on one kneeAnd lifts their faces by the chin to hersAnd says their names, and leaves them where they are.”The lawyer wore a watch the case of whichWas cunningly devised to make a noiseLike a small pistol when he snapped it shutAt such a time as this. He snapped it now.“Well, Anne, go, dearie. Our affair will wait.The lawyer man is thinking of his train.He wants to give me lots and lots of moneyBefore he goes, because I hurt myself,And it may take him I don’t know how long.But put our flowers in water first. Will, help her:The pitcher’s too full for her. There’s no cup?Just hook them on the inside of the pitcher.Now run.—Get out your documents! You seeI have to keep on the good side of Anne.I’m a great boy to think of number one.And you can’t blame me in the place I’m in.Who will take care of my necessitiesUnless I do?”“A pretty interlude,”The lawyer said. “I’m sorry, but my train—Luckily terms are all agreed upon.You only have to sign your name. Right—there.”“You, Will, stop making faces. Come round hereWhere you can’t make them. What is it you want?I’ll put you out with Anne. Be good or go.”“You don’t mean you will sign that thing unread?”“Make yourself useful then, and read it for me.Isn’t it something I have seen before?”“You’ll find it is. Let your friend look at it.”“Yes, but all that takes time, and I’m as muchIn haste to get it over with as you.But read it, read it. That’s right, draw the curtain:Half the time I don’t know what’s troubling me.—What do you say, Will? Don’t you be a fool,You! crumpling folkses legal documents.Out with it if you’ve any real objection.”“Five hundred dollars!”“What would you think right?”“A thousand wouldn’t be a cent too much;You know it, Mr. Lawyer. The sin isAccepting anything before he knowsWhether he’s ever going to walk again.It smells to me like a dishonest trick.”“I think—I think—from what I heard to-day—And saw myself—he would be ill-advised——”“What did you hear, for instance?” Willis said.“Now the place where the accident occurred——”The Broken One was twisted in his bed.“This is between you two apparently.Where I come in is what I want to know.You stand up to it like a pair of cocks.Go outdoors if you want to fight. Spare me.When you come back, I’ll have the papers signed.Will pencil do? Then, please, your fountain pen.One of you hold my head up from the pillow.”Willis flung off the bed. “I wash my hands—I’m no match—no, and don’t pretend to be——”The lawyer gravely capped his fountain pen.“You’re doing the wise thing: you won’t regret it.We’re very sorry for you.”Willis sneered:“Who’s we?—some stockholders in Boston?I’ll go outdoors, by gad, and won’t come back.”“Willis, bring Anne back with you when you come.Yes. Thanks for caring. Don’t mind Will: he’s savage.He thinks you ought to pay me for my flowers.You don’t know what I mean about the flowers.Don’t stop to try to now. You’ll miss your train.Good-bye.” He flung his arms around his face.   There's a patch of old snow in a corner     That I should have guessedWas a blow-away paper the rain     Had brought to rest.It is speckled with grime as if     Small print overspread it,The news of a day I’ve forgotten—     If I ever read it.   She stood against the kitchen sink, and lookedOver the sink out through a dusty windowAt weeds the water from the sink made tall.She wore her cape; her hat was in her hand.Behind her was confusion in the room,Of chairs turned upside down to sit like peopleIn other chairs, and something, come to look,For every room a house has—parlor, bed-room,And dining-room—thrown pell-mell in the kitchen.And now and then a smudged, infernal faceLooked in a door behind her and addressedHer back. She always answered without turning.“Where will I put this walnut bureau, lady?”“Put it on top of something that’s on topOf something else,” she laughed. “Oh, put it whereYou can to-night, and go. It’s almost dark;You must be getting started back to town.”Another blackened face thrust in and lookedAnd smiled, and when she did not turn, spoke gently,“What are you seeing out the window, lady?”“Never was I beladied so before.Would evidence of having been called ladyMore than so many times make me a ladyIn common law, I wonder.”“But I ask,What are you seeing out the window, lady?”“What I’ll be seeing more of in the yearsTo come as here I stand and go the roundOf many plates with towels many times.”“And what is that? You only put me off.”“Rank weeds that love the water from the dish-panMore than some women like the dish-pan, Joe;A little stretch of mowing-field for you;Not much of that until I come to woodsThat end all. And it’s scarce enough to callA view.”“And yet you think you like it, dear?”“That’s what you’re so concerned to know! You hopeI like it. Bang goes something big awayOff there upstairs. The very tread of menAs great as those is shattering to the frameOf such a little house. Once left alone,You and I, dear, will go with softer stepsUp and down stairs and through the rooms, and noneBut sudden winds that snatch them from our handsWill ever slam the doors.”“I think you seeMore than you like to own to out that window.”“No; for besides the things I tell you of,I only see the years. They come and goIn alternation with the weeds, the field,The wood.”“What kind of years?”“Why, latter years—Different from early years.”“I see them, too.You didn’t count them?”“No, the further offSo ran together that I didn’t try to.It can scarce be that they would be in numberWe’d care to know, for we are not young now.And bang goes something else away off there.It sounds as if it were the men went down,And every crash meant one less to returnTo lighted city streets we, too, have known,But now are giving up for country darkness.”“Come from that window where you see too much for me,And take a livelier view of things from here.They’re going. Watch this husky swarming upOver the wheel into the sky-high seat,Lighting his pipe now, squinting down his noseAt the flame burning downward as he sucks it.”“See how it makes his nose-side bright, a proofHow dark it’s getting. Can you tell what timeIt is by that? Or by the moon? The new moon!What shoulder did I see her over? Neither.A wire she is of silver, as new as weTo everything. Her light won’t last us long.It’s something, though, to know we’re going to have herNight after night and stronger every nightTo see us through our first two weeks. But, Joe,The stove! Before they go! Knock on the window;Ask them to help you get it on its feet.We stand here dreaming. Hurry! Call them back!”“They’re not gone yet.”“We’ve got to have the stove,Whatever else we want for. And a light.Have we a piece of candle if the lampAnd oil are buried out of reach?”AgainThe house was full of tramping, and the dark,Door-filling men burst in and seized the stove.A cannon-mouth-like hole was in the wall,To which they set it true by eye; and thenCame up the jointed stovepipe in their hands,So much too light and airy for their strengthIt almost seemed to come ballooning up,Slipping from clumsy clutches toward the ceiling.“A fit!” said one, and banged a stovepipe shoulder.“It’s good luck when you move in to beginWith good luck with your stovepipe. Never mind,It’s not so bad in the country, settled down,When people ’re getting on in life, You’ll like it.”Joe said: “You big boys ought to find a farm,And make good farmers, and leave other fellowsThe city work to do. There’s not enoughFor everybody as it is in there.”“God!” one said wildly, and, when no one spoke:“Say that to Jimmy here. He needs a farm.”But Jimmy only made his jaw recedeFool-like, and rolled his eyes as if to sayHe saw himself a farmer. Then there was a French boyWho said with seriousness that made them laugh,“Ma friend, you ain’t know what it is you’re ask.”He doffed his cap and held it with both handsAcross his chest to make as ’twere a bow:“We’re giving you our chances on de farm.”And then they all turned to with deafening bootsAnd put each other bodily out of the house.“Goodby to them! We puzzle them. They think—I don’t know what they think we see in whatThey leave us to: that pasture slope that seemsThe back some farm presents us; and your woodsTo northward from your window at the sink,Waiting to steal a step on us wheneverWe drop our eyes or turn to other things,As in the game ‘Ten-step’ the children play.”“Good boys they seemed, and let them love the city.All they could say was ‘God!’ when you proposedTheir coming out and making useful farmers.”“Did they make something lonesome go through you?It would take more than them to sicken you—Us of our bargain. But they left us soAs to our fate, like fools past reasoning with.They almost shook me.”“It’s all so muchWhat we have always wanted, I confessIt’s seeming bad for a moment makes it seemEven worse still, and so on down, down, down.It’s nothing; it’s their leaving us at dusk.I never bore it well when people went.The first night after guests have gone, the houseSeems haunted or exposed. I always takeA personal interest in the locking upAt bedtime; but the strangeness soon wears off.”He fetched a dingy lantern from behindA door. “There’s that we didn’t lose! And these!”—Some matches he unpocketed. “For food—The meals we’ve had no one can take from us.I wish that everything on earth were justAs certain as the meals we’ve had. I wishThe meals we haven’t had were, anyway.What have you you know where to lay your hands on?”“The bread we bought in passing at the store.There’s butter somewhere, too.”“Let’s rend the bread.I’ll light the fire for company for you;You’ll not have any other companyTill Ed begins to get out on a SundayTo look us over and give us his ideaOf what wants pruning, shingling, breaking up.He’ll know what he would do if he were we,And all at once. He’ll plan for us and planTo help us, but he’ll take it out in planning.Well, you can set the table with the loaf.Let’s see you find your loaf. I’ll light the fire.I like chairs occupying other chairsNot offering a lady—”“There again, Joe!You’re tired.”“I’m drunk-nonsensical tired out;Don’t mind a word I say. It’s a day’s workTo empty one house of all household goodsAnd fill another with ’em fifteen miles away,Although you do no more than dump them down.”“Dumped down in paradise we are and happy.”“It’s all so much what I have always wanted,I can’t believe it’s what you wanted, too.”“Shouldn’t you like to know?”“I’d like to knowIf it is what you wanted, then how muchYou wanted it for me.”“A troubled conscience!You don’t want me to tell if I don’t know.”“I don’t want to find out what can’t be known.But who first said the word to come?”“My dear,It’s who first thought the thought. You’re searching, Joe,For things that don’t exist; I mean beginnings.Ends and beginnings—there are no such things.There are only middles.”“What is this?”“This life?Our sitting here by lantern-light togetherAmid the wreckage of a former home?You won’t deny the lantern isn’t new.The stove is not, and you are not to me,Nor I to you.”“Perhaps you never were?”“It would take me forever to reciteAll that’s not new in where we find ourselves.New is a word for fools in towns who thinkStyle upon style in dress and thought at lastMust get somewhere. I’ve heard you say as much.No, this is no beginning.”“Then an end?”“End is a gloomy word.”“Is it too lateTo drag you out for just a good-night callOn the old peach trees on the knoll to gropeBy starlight in the grass for a last peachThe neighbors may not have taken as their rightWhen the house wasn’t lived in? I’ve been looking:I doubt if they have left us many grapes.Before we set ourselves to right the house,The first thing in the morning, out we goTo go the round of apple, cherry, peach,Pine, alder, pasture, mowing, well, and brook.All of a farm it is.”“I know this much:I’m going to put you in your bed, if firstI have to make you build it. Come, the light.”When there was no more lantern in the kitchen,The fire got out through crannies in the stoveAnd danced in yellow wrigglers on the ceiling,As much at home as if they’d always danced there.   By June our brook’s run out of song and speed.Sought for much after that, it will be foundEither to have gone groping underground(And taken with it all the Hyla breedThat shouted in the mist a month ago,Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow)—Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed,Weak foliage that is blown upon and bentEven against the way its waters went.Its bed is left a faded paper sheetOf dead leaves stuck together by the heat—A brook to none but who remember long.This as it will be seen is other farThan with brooks taken otherwhere in song.We love the things we love for what they are.   Something inspires the only cow of lateTo make no more of a wall than an open gate,And think no more of wall-builders than fools.Her face is flecked with pomace and she droolsA cider syrup. Having tasted fruit,She scorns a pasture withering to the root.She runs from tree to tree where lie and sweetenThe windfalls spiked with stubble and worm-eaten.She leaves them bitten when she has to fly.She bellows on a knoll against the sky.Her udder shrivels and the milk goes dry.  Once on the kind of day called “weather breeder,"When the heat slowly hazes and the sunBy its own power seems to be undone,I was half boring through, half climbing throughA swamp of cedar. Choked with oil of cedarAnd scurf of plants, and weary and over-heated,And sorry I ever left the road I knew,I paused and rested on a sort of hookThat had me by the coat as good as seated,And since there was no other way to look,Looked up toward heaven, and there against the blue,Stood over me a resurrected tree,A tree that had been down and raised again—A barkless spectre. He had halted too,As if for fear of treading upon me.I saw the strange position of his hands—Up at his shoulders, dragging yellow strandsOf wire with something in it from men to men.“You here?” I said. “Where aren’t you nowadaysAnd what’s the news you carry—if you know?And tell me where you’re off for—Montreal?Me? I’m not off for anywhere at all.Sometimes I wander out of beaten waysHalf looking for the orchid Calypso.”  The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strungAnd cut a flower beside a ground bird’s nestBefore it stained a single human breast.The stricken flower bent double and so hung.And still the bird revisited her young.A butterfly its fall had dispossessedA moment sought in air his flower of rest,Then lightly stooped to it and fluttering clung.On the bare upland pasture there had spreadO’ernight ’twixt mullein stalks a wheel of threadAnd straining cables wet with silver dew.A sudden passing bullet shook it dry.The indwelling spider ran to greet the fly,But finding nothing, sullenly withdrew.   LONELINESS(Her Word)One ought not to have to care  So much as you and ICare when the birds come round the house  To seem to say good-bye;Or care so much when they come back       With whatever it is they sing;The truth being we are as much  Too glad for the one thingAs we are too sad for the other here—  With birds that fill their breasts      But with each other and themselves And their built or driven nests. HOUSE FEARAlways—I tell you this they learned—Always at night when they returnedTo the lonely house from far away        To lamps unlighted and fire gone gray,They learned to rattle the lock and keyTo give whatever might chance to beWarning and time to be off in flight:And preferring the out- to the in-door night,       They learned to leave the house-door wideUntil they had lit the lamp inside. THE SMILE(Her Word)I didn’t like the way he went away.That smile! It never came of being gay.Still he smiled—did you see him?—I was sure!     Perhaps because we gave him only breadAnd the wretch knew from that that we were poor.Perhaps because he let us give insteadOf seizing from us as he might have seized.Perhaps he mocked at us for being wed,Or being very young (and he was pleasedTo have a vision of us old and dead).I wonder how far down the road he’s got.He’s watching from the woods as like as not. THE OFT-REPEATED DREAMShe had no saying dark enough  For the dark pine that keptForever trying the window-latch  Of the room where they slept.The tireless but ineffectual hands  That with every futile pass      Made the great tree seem as a little bird  Before the mystery of glass!It never had been inside the room,  And only one of the twoWas afraid in an oft-repeated dream       Of what the tree might do. THE IMPULSEIt was too lonely for her there,  And too wild,And since there were but two of them,  And no child,And work was little in the house,  She was free,And followed where he furrowed field,  Or felled tree. She rested on a log and tossed  The fresh chips,With a song only to herself  On her lips.And once she went to break a bough  Of black alder.She strayed so far she scarcely heard  When he called her—And didn’t answer—didn’t speak—  Or return.She stood, and then she ran and hid          In the fern.He never found her, though he looked  Everywhere,And he asked at her mother’s house  Was she there.      Sudden and swift and light as that  The ties gave,And he learned of finalities  Besides the grave.   “Oh, let’s go up the hill and scare ourselves,As reckless as the best of them to-night,By setting fire to all the brush we piledWith pitchy hands to wait for rain or snow.Oh, let’s not wait for rain to make it safe.The pile is ours: we dragged it bough on boughDown dark converging paths between the pines.Let’s not care what we do with it to-night.Divide it? No! But burn it as one pileThe way we piled it. And let’s be the talkOf people brought to windows by a lightThrown from somewhere against their wall-paper.Rouse them all, both the free and not so freeWith saying what they’d like to do to usFor what they’d better wait till we have done.Let’s all but bring to life this old volcano,If that is what the mountain ever was—And scare ourselves. Let wild fire loose we will….”“And scare you too?” the children said together.“Why wouldn’t it scare me to have a fireBegin in smudge with ropy smoke and knowThat still, if I repent, I may recall it,But in a moment not: a little spurtOf burning fatness, and then nothing butThe fire itself can put it out, and thatBy burning out, and before it burns outIt will have roared first and mixed sparks with stars,And sweeping round it with a flaming sword,Made the dim trees stand back in wider circle—Done so much and I know not how much moreI mean it shall not do if I can bind it.Well if it doesn’t with its draft bring onA wind to blow in earnest from some quarter,As once it did with me upon an April.The breezes were so spent with winter blowingThey seemed to fail the bluebirds under themShort of the perch their languid flight was toward;And my flame made a pinnacle to heavenAs I walked once round it in possession.But the wind out of doors—you know the saying.There came a gust. You used to think the treesMade wind by fanning since you never knewIt blow but that you saw the trees in motion.Something or someone watching made that gust.It put the flame tip-down and dabbed the grassOf over-winter with the least tip-touchYour tongue gives salt or sugar in your hand.The place it reached to blackened instantly.The black was all there was by day-light,That and the merest curl of cigarette smoke—And a flame slender as the hepaticas,Blood-root, and violets so soon to be now.But the black spread like black death on the ground,And I think the sky darkened with a cloudLike winter and evening coming on together.There were enough things to be thought of then.Where the field stretches toward the northAnd setting sun to Hyla brook, I gave itTo flames without twice thinking, where it vergesUpon the road, to flames too, though in fearThey might find fuel there, in withered brake,Grass its full length, old silver golden-rod,And alder and grape vine entanglement,To leap the dusty deadline. For my ownI took what front there was beside. I kneltAnd thrust hands in and held my face away.Fight such a fire by rubbing not by beating.A board is the best weapon if you have it.I had my coat. And oh, I knew, I knew,And said out loud, I couldn’t bide the smotherAnd heat so close in; but the thought of allThe woods and town on fire by me, and allThe town turned out to fight for me—that held me.I trusted the brook barrier, but fearedThe road would fail; and on that side the fireDied not without a noise of crackling wood—Of something more than tinder-grass and weed—That brought me to my feet to hold it backBy leaning back myself, as if the reinsWere round my neck and I was at the plough.I won! But I’m sure no one ever spreadAnother color over a tenth the spaceThat I spread coal-black over in the timeIt took me. Neighbors coming home from townCouldn’t believe that so much black had come thereWhile they had backs turned, that it hadn’t been thereWhen they had passed an hour or so beforeGoing the other way and they not seen it.They looked about for someone to have done it.But there was no one. I was somewhere wonderingWhere all my weariness had gone and whyI walked so light on air in heavy shoesIn spite of a scorched Fourth-of-July feeling.Why wouldn’t I be scared remembering that?”“If it scares you, what will it do to us?”“Scare you. But if you shrink from being scared,What would you say to war if it should come?That’s what for reasons I should like to know—If you can comfort me by any answer.”“Oh, but war’s not for children—it’s for men.”“Now we are digging almost down to China.My dears, my dears, you thought that—we all thought it.So your mistake was ours. Haven’t you heard, though,About the ships where war has found them outAt sea, about the towns where war has comeThrough opening clouds at night with droning speedFurther o’erhead than all but stars and angels,—And children in the ships and in the towns?Haven’t you heard what we have lived to learn?Nothing so new—something we had forgotten:War is for everyone, for children too.I wasn’t going to tell you and I mustn’t.The best way is to come up hill with meAnd have our fire and laugh and be afraid.”  A neighbor of mine in the village    Likes to tell how one springWhen she was a girl on the farm, she did    A childlike thing.One day she asked her father    To give her a garden plotTo plant and tend and reap herself,    And he said, “Why not?”In casting about for a corner    He thought of an idle bitOf walled-off ground where a shop had stood,    And he said, “Just it.”And he said, “That ought to make you    An ideal one-girl farm,And give you a chance to put some strength    On your slim-jim arm.”It was not enough of a garden,    Her father said, to plough;So she had to work it all by hand,    But she don’t mind now.She wheeled the dung in the wheelbarrow    Along a stretch of road;But she always ran away and left    Her not-nice load.And hid from anyone passing.    And then she begged the seed.She says she thinks she planted one    Of all things but weed.A hill each of potatoes,    Radishes, lettuce, peas,Tomatoes, beets, beans, pumpkins, corn,    And even fruit treesAnd yes, she has long mistrusted    That a cider apple treeIn bearing there to-day is hers,    Or at least may be.Her crop was a miscellany    When all was said and done,A little bit of everything,    A great deal of none.Now when she sees in the village    How village things go,Just when it seems to come in right,    She says, “I know!It’s as when I was a farmer——”    Oh, never by way of advice!And she never sins by telling the tale    To the same person twice.   When we locked up the house at night,We always locked the flowers outsideAnd cut them off from the window light.The time I dreamed the door was triedAnd brushed with buttons upon sleeves,The flowers were out there with the thieves.Yet nobody molested them!We did find one nasturtiumUpon the steps with bitten stem.I may have been to blame for that:I always thought it must have beenSome flower I played with as I satAt dusk to watch the moon down early.  The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yardAnd made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of wood,Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.And from there those that lifted eyes could countFive mountain ranges one behind the otherUnder the sunset far into Vermont.And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled,As it ran light, or had to bear a load.And nothing happened: day was all but done.Call it a day, I wish they might have saidTo please the boy by giving him the half hourThat a boy counts so much when saved from work.His sister stood beside them in her apronTo tell them “Supper.” At the word, the saw,As if to prove saws knew what supper meant,Leaped out at the boy’s hand, or seemed to leap—He must have given the hand. However it was,Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!The boy’s first outcry was a rueful laugh,As he swung toward them holding up the handHalf in appeal, but half as if to keepThe life from spilling. Then the boy saw all—Since he was old enough to know, big boyDoing a man’s work, though a child at heart—He saw all spoiled. “Don’t let him cut my hand off—The doctor, when he comes. Don’t let him, sister!”So. But the hand was gone already.The doctor put him in the dark of ether.He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.And then—the watcher at his pulse took fright.No one believed. They listened at his heart.Little—less—nothing!—and that ended it.No more to build on there. And they, since theyWere not the one dead, turned to their affairs.  Brown lived at such a lofty farm  That everyone for miles could seeHis lantern when he did his chores  In winter after half-past three.And many must have seen him make  His wild descent from there one night,’Cross lots, ’cross walls, ’cross everything,  Describing rings of lantern light.Between the house and barn the gale  Got him by something he had onAnd blew him out on the icy crust  That cased the world, and he was gone!Walls were all buried, trees were few:  He saw no stay unless he stoveA hole in somewhere with his heel.  But though repeatedly he stroveAnd stamped and said things to himself,  And sometimes something seemed to yield,He gained no foothold, but pursued  His journey down from field to field.Sometimes he came with arms outspread  Like wings, revolving in the sceneUpon his longer axis, and  With no small dignity of mien.Faster or slower as he chanced,  Sitting or standing as he chose,According as he feared to risk  His neck, or thought to spare his clothes,He never let the lantern drop.  And some exclaimed who saw afarThe figures he described with it,  ”I wonder what those signals areBrown makes at such an hour of night!  He’s celebrating something strange.I wonder if he’s sold his farm,  Or been made Master of the Grange.”He reeled, he lurched, he bobbed, he checked;  He fell and made the lantern rattle(But saved the light from going out.)  So half-way down he fought the battleIncredulous of his own bad luck.  And then becoming reconciledTo everything, he gave it up  And came down like a coasting child.“Well—I—be—” that was all he said,  As standing in the river road,He looked back up the slippery slope  (Two miles it was) to his abode.Sometimes as an authority  On motor-cars, I’m asked if IShould say our stock was petered out,  And this is my sincere reply:Yankees are what they always were.  Don’t think Brown ever gave up hopeOf getting home again because  He couldn’t climb that slippery slope;Or even thought of standing there  Until the January thawShould take the polish off the crust.  He bowed with grace to natural law,And then went round it on his feet,  After the manner of our stock;Not much concerned for those to whom,  At that particular time o’clock,It must have looked as if the course  He steered was really straight awayFrom that which he was headed for—  Not much concerned for them, I say:No more so than became a man—  And politician at odd seasons.I’ve kept Brown standing in the cold  While I invested him with reasons;But now he snapped his eyes three times;  Then shook his lantern, saying, “Ile’s’Bout out!” and took the long way home  By road, a matter of several miles.  There overtook me and drew me inTo his down-hill, early-morning stride,And set me five miles on my roadBetter than if he had had me ride,A man with a swinging bag for loadAnd half the bag wound round his hand.We talked like barking above the dinOf water we walked along beside.And for my telling him where I’d beenAnd where I lived in mountain landTo be coming home the way I was,He told me a little about himself.He came from higher up in the passWhere the grist of the new-beginning brooksIs blocks split off the mountain mass—And hopeless grist enough it looksEver to grind to soil for grass.(The way it is will do for moss.)There he had built his stolen shack.It had to be a stolen shackBecause of the fears of fire and lossThat trouble the sleep of lumber folk:Visions of half the world burned blackAnd the sun shrunken yellow in smoke.We know who when they come to townBring berries under the wagon seat,Or a basket of eggs between their feet;What this man brought in a cotton sackWas gum, the gum of the mountain spruce.He showed me lumps of the scented stuffLike uncut jewels, dull and rough.It comes to market golden brown;But turns to pink between the teeth.I told him this is a pleasant lifeTo set your breast to the bark of treesThat all your days are dim beneath,And reaching up with a little knife,To loose the resin and take it downAnd bring it to market when you please.   He is said to have been the last Red ManIn Acton. And the Miller is said to have laughed—If you like to call such a sound a laugh.But he gave no one else a laugher’s license.For he turned suddenly grave as if to say,“Whose business,—if I take it on myself,Whose business—but why talk round the barn?—When it’s just that I hold with getting a thing done with.”You can’t get back and see it as he saw it.It’s too long a story to go into now.You’d have to have been there and lived it.Then you wouldn’t have looked on it as just a matterOf who began it between the two races.Some guttural exclamation of surpriseThe Red Man gave in poking about the millOver the great big thumping shuffling mill-stoneDisgusted the Miller physically as comingFrom one who had no right to be heard from.“Come, John,” he said, “you want to see the wheel pit?”He took him down below a cramping rafter,And showed him, through a manhole in the floor,The water in desperate straits like frantic fish,Salmon and sturgeon, lashing with their tails.Then he shut down the trap door with a ring in itThat jangled even above the general noise,And came up stairs alone—and gave that laugh,And said something to a man with a meal-sackThat the man with the meal-sack didn’t catch—then.Oh, yes, he showed John the wheel pit all right.   The three stood listening to a fresh accessOf wind that caught against the house a moment,Gulped snow, and then blew free again—the ColesDressed, but dishevelled from some hours of sleep,Meserve belittled in the great skin coat he wore.Meserve was first to speak. He pointed backwardOver his shoulder with his pipe-stem, saying,“You can just see it glancing off the roofMaking a great scroll upward toward the sky,Long enough for recording all our names on.—I think I’ll just call up my wife and tell herI’m here—so far—and starting on again.I’ll call her softly so that if she’s wiseAnd gone to sleep, she needn’t wake to answer.”Three times he barely stirred the bell, then listened.“Why, Lett, still up? Lett, I’m at Cole’s. I’m late.I called you up to say Good-night from hereBefore I went to say Good-morning there.—I thought I would.— I know, but, Lett—I know—I could, but what’s the sense? The rest won’t beSo bad.— Give me an hour for it.— Ho, ho,Three hours to here! But that was all up hill;The rest is down.— Why no, no, not a wallow:They kept their heads and took their time to itLike darlings, both of them. They’re in the barn.—My dear, I’m coming just the same. I didn’tCall you to ask you to invite me home.—”He lingered for some word she wouldn’t say,Said it at last himself, “Good-night,” and then,Getting no answer, closed the telephone.The three stood in the lamplight round the tableWith lowered eyes a moment till he said,“I’ll just see how the horses are.”                                                       “Yes, do,”Both the Coles said together. Mrs. ColeAdded: “You can judge better after seeing.—I want you here with me, Fred. Leave him here,Brother Meserve. You know to find your wayOut through the shed.”                                     “I guess I know my way,I guess I know where I can find my nameCarved in the shed to tell me who I amIf it don’t tell me where I am. I usedTo play—”                     “You tend your horses and come back.Fred Cole, you’re going to let him!”                                                        “Well, aren’t you?How can you help yourself?”                                                 “I called him Brother.Why did I call him that?”                                         “It’s right enough.That’s all you ever heard him called round here.He seems to have lost off his Christian name.”“Christian enough I should call that myself.He took no notice, did he? Well, at leastI didn’t use it out of love of him,The dear knows. I detest the thought of himWith his ten children under ten years old.I hate his wretched little Racker Sect,All’s ever I heard of it, which isn’t much.But that’s not saying—Look, Fred Cole, it’s twelve,Isn’t it, now? He’s been here half an hour.He says he left the village store at nine.Three hours to do four miles—a mile an hourOr not much better. Why, it doesn’t seemAs if a man could move that slow and move.Try to think what he did with all that time.And three miles more to go!”                                            “Don’t let him go.Stick to him, Helen. Make him answer you.That sort of man talks straight on all his lifeFrom the last thing he said himself, stone deafTo anything anyone else may say.I should have thought, though, you could make him hear you.”“What is he doing out a night like this?Why can’t he stay at home?”                                              “He had to preach.”“It’s no night to be out.”                                          “He may be small,He may be good, but one thing’s sure, he’s tough.”“And strong of stale tobacco.”                                                    “He’ll pull through.’“You only say so. Not another houseOr shelter to put into from this placeTo theirs. I’m going to call his wife again.”“Wait and he may. Let’s see what he will do.Let’s see if he will think of her again.But then I doubt he’s thinking of himselfHe doesn’t look on it as anything.”“He shan’t go—there!”                                         “It is a night, my dear.”“One thing: he didn’t drag God into it.”“He don’t consider it a case for God.”“You think so, do you? You don’t know the kind.He’s getting up a miracle this minute.Privately—to himself, right now, he’s thinkingHe’ll make a case of it if he succeeds,But keep still if he fails.”                                              “Keep still all over.He’ll be dead—dead and buried.”                                                       “Such a trouble!Not but I’ve every reason not to careWhat happens to him if it only takesSome of the sanctimonious conceitOut of one of those pious scalawags.”“Nonsense to that! You want to see him safe.”“You like the runt.”                               “Don’t you a little?”                                                                  “Well,I don’t like what he’s doing, which is whatYou like, and like him for.”                                            “Oh, yes you do.You like your fun as well as anyone;Only you women have to put these airs onTo impress men. You’ve got us so ashamedOf being men we can’t look at a good fightBetween two boys and not feel bound to stop it.Let the man freeze an ear or two, I say.—He’s here. I leave him all to you. Go in And save his life.— All right, come in, Meserve.Sit down, sit down. How did you find the horses?”“Fine, fine.”                    “And ready for some more? My wife hereSays it won’t do. You’ve got to give it up.”“Won’t you to please me? Please! If I say please?Mr. Meserve, I’ll leave it to your wife.What did your wife say on the telephone?”Meserve seemed to heed nothing but the lampOr something not far from it on the table.By straightening out and lifting a forefinger,He pointed with his hand from where it layLike a white crumpled spider on his knee:“That leaf there in your open book! It movedJust then, I thought. It’s stood erect like that,There on the table, ever since I came,Trying to turn itself backward or forward,I’ve had my eye on it to make out which;If forward, then it’s with a friend’s impatience—You see I know—to get you on to thingsIt wants to see how you will take, if backwardIt’s from regret for something you have passedAnd failed to see the good of. Never mind,Things must expect to come in front of usA many times—I don’t say just how many—That varies with the things—before we see them.One of the lies would make it out that nothingEver presents itself before us twice.Where would we be at last if that were so?Our very life depends on everything’sRecurring till we answer from within.The thousandth time may prove the charm.— That leaf!It can’t turn either way. It needs the wind’s help.But the wind didn’t move it if it moved.It moved itself. The wind’s at naught in here.It couldn’t stir so sensitively poisedA thing as that. It couldn’t reach the lampTo get a puff of black smoke from the flame,Or blow a rumple in the collie’s coat.You make a little foursquare block of air,Quiet and light and warm, in spite of allThe illimitable dark and cold and storm,And by so doing give these three, lamp, dog,And book-leaf, that keep near you, their repose;Though for all anyone can tell, reposeMay be the thing you haven’t, yet you give it.So false it is that what we haven’t we can’t give;So false, that what we always say is true.I’ll have to turn the leaf if no one else will.It won’t lie down. Then let it stand. Who cares?”“I shouldn’t want to hurry you, Meserve,But if you’re going— Say you’ll stay, you know?But let me raise this curtain on a scene,And show you how it’s piling up against you.You see the snow-white through the white of frost?Ask Helen how far up the sash it’s climbedSince last we read the gage.”                                                 “It looks as ifSome pallid thing had squashed its features flatAnd its eyes shut with overeagernessTo see what people found so interestingIn one another, and had gone to sleepOf its own stupid lack of understanding,Or broken its white neck of mushroom stuffShort off, and died against the window-pane.”“Brother Meserve, take care, you’ll scare yourselfMore than you will us with such nightmare talk.It’s you it matters to, because it’s youWho have to go out into it alone.”“Let him talk, Helen, and perhaps he’ll stay.”“Before you drop the curtain—I’m reminded:You recollect the boy who came out hereTo breathe the air one winter—had a roomDown at the Averys’? Well, one sunny morningAfter a downy storm, he passed our placeAnd found me banking up the house with snow.And I was burrowing in deep for warmth,Piling it well above the window-sills.The snow against the window caught his eye.‘Hey, that’s a pretty thought’—those were his words.‘So you can think it’s six feet deep outside,While you sit warm and read up balanced rations.You can’t get too much winter in the winter.’Those were his words. And he went home and allBut banked the daylight out of Avery’s windows.Now you and I would go to no such length.At the same time you can’t deny it makesIt not a mite worse, sitting here, we three,Playing our fancy, to have the snowline runSo high across the pane outside. There whereThere is a sort of tunnel in the frostMore like a tunnel than a hole—way downAt the far end of it you see a stirAnd quiver like the frayed edge of the driftBlown in the wind. I like that—I like that.Well, now I leave you, people.”                                               “Come, Meserve,We thought you were deciding not to go—The ways you found to say the praise of comfortAnd being where you are. You want to stay.”“I’ll own it’s cold for such a fall of snow.This house is frozen brittle, all exceptThis room you sit in. If you think the windSounds further off, it’s not because it’s dying;You’re further under in the snow—that’s all—And feel it less. Hear the soft bombs of dustIt bursts against us at the chimney mouth,And at the eaves. I like it from insideMore than I shall out in it. But the horsesAre rested and it’s time to say good-night,And let you get to bed again. Good-night,Sorry I had to break in on your sleep.”“Lucky for you you did. Lucky for youYou had us for a half-way stationTo stop at. If you were the kind of manPaid heed to women, you’d take my adviceAnd for your family’s sake stay where you are.But what good is my saying it over and over?You’ve done more than you had a right to thinkYou could do—now. You know the risk you takeIn going on.”                       “Our snow-storms as a ruleAren’t looked on as man-killers, and althoughI’d rather be the beast that sleeps the sleepUnder it all, his door sealed up and lost,Than the man fighting it to keep above it,Yet think of the small birds at roost and notIn nests. Shall I be counted less than they are?Their bulk in water would be frozen rockIn no time out to-night. And yet to-morrowThey will come budding boughs from tree to treeFlirting their wings and saying Chickadee,As if not knowing what you meant by the word storm.”“But why when no one wants you to go on?Your wife—she doesn’t want you to. We don’t,And you yourself don’t want to. Who else is there?”“Save us from being cornered by a woman.Well, there’s”—She told Fred afterward that inThe pause right there, she thought the dreaded wordWas coming, “God.” But no, he only said“Well, there’s—the storm. That says I must go on.That wants me as a war might if it came.Ask any man.”                            He threw her that as somethingTo last her till he got outside the door.He had Cole with him to the barn to see him off.When Cole returned he found his wife still standingBeside the table near the open book,Not reading it.                          “Well, what kind of a manDo you call that?” she said.                                        “He had the giftOf words, or is it tongues, I ought to say?”“Was ever such a man for seeing likeness?”“Or disregarding people’s civil questions—What? We’ve found out in one hour more about himThan we had seeing him pass by in the roadA thousand times. If that’s the way he preaches!You didn’t think you’d keep him after all.Oh, I’m not blaming you. He didn’t leave youMuch say in the matter, and I’m just as gladWe’re not in for a night of him. No sleepIf he had stayed. The least thing set him going.It’s quiet as an empty church without him.”“But how much better off are we as it is?We’ll have to sit here till we know he’s safe.”“Yes, I suppose you’ll want to, but I shouldn’t.He knows what he can do, or he wouldn’t try.Get into bed I say, and get some rest.He won’t come back, and if he telephones,It won’t be for an hour or two.”                                                    “Well then.We can’t be any help by sitting hereAnd living his fight through with him, I suppose.”                             . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cole had been telephoning in the dark.Mrs. Cole’s voice came from an inner room:“Did she call you or you call her?”                                                        “She me.You’d better dress: you won’t go back to bed.We must have been asleep: it’s three and after.”“Had she been ringing long? I’ll get my wrapper.I want to speak to her.”                                          “All she said was,He hadn’t come and had he really started.”“She knew he had, poor thing, two hours ago.”“He had the shovel. He’ll have made a fight.”“Why did I ever let him leave this house!”“Don’t begin that. You did the best you couldTo keep him—though perhaps you didn’t quiteConceal a wish to see him show the spunkTo disobey you. Much his wife’ll thank you.”“Fred, after all I said! You shan’t make outThat it was any way but what it was.Did she let on by any word she saidShe didn’t thank me?”                                        “When I told her ‘Gone,’‘Well then,’ she said, and ‘Well then’—like a threat.And then her voice came scraping slow: ‘Oh, you,Why did you let him go’?”                                             “Asked why we let him?You let me there. I’ll ask her why she let him.She didn’t dare to speak when he was here.Their number’s—twenty-one? The thing won’t work.Someone’s receiver’s down. The handle stumbles.The stubborn thing, the way it jars your arm!It’s theirs. She’s dropped it from her hand and gone.”“Try speaking. Say ‘Hello’!”                                                  “Hello. Hello.”“What do you hear?”                                    “I hear an empty room—You know—it sounds that way. And yes, I hear—I think I hear a clock—and windows rattling.No step though. If she’s there she’s sitting down.”“Shout, she may hear you.”                                             “Shouting is no good.”“Keep speaking then.”                                            “Hello. Hello. Hello.You don’t suppose—? She wouldn’t go out doors?”“I’m half afraid that’s just what she might do.”“And leave the children?”                                           “Wait and call again.You can’t hear whether she has left the doorWide open and the wind’s blown out the lampAnd the fire’s died and the room’s dark and cold?”“One of two things, either she’s gone to bedOr gone out doors.”                               “In which case both are lost.Do you know what she’s like? Have you ever met her?It’s strange she doesn’t want to speak to us.”“Fred, see if you can hear what I hear. Come.”“A clock maybe.”                               “Don’t you hear something else?”“Not talking.”                        “No.”                                        “Why, yes, I hear—what is it?”“What do you say it is?”                                         “A baby’s crying!Frantic it sounds, though muffled and far off.”“Its mother wouldn’t let it cry like that,Not if she’s there.”                                “What do you make of it?”“There’s only one thing possible to make,That is, assuming—that she has gone out.Of course she hasn’t though.”                                                   They both sat downHelpless. “There’s nothing we can do till morning.”“Fred, I shan’t let you think of going out.”“Hold on.” The double bell began to chirp.They started up. Fred took the telephone.“Hello, Meserve. You’re there, then!—And your wife?Good! Why I asked—she didn’t seem to answer.He says she went to let him in the barn.—We’re glad. Oh, say no more about it, man.Drop in and see us when you’re passing.”                                                                   “Well,She has him then, though what she wants him forI don’t see.”                        “Possibly not for herself.Maybe she only wants him for the children.”“The whole to-do seems to have been for nothing.What spoiled our night was to him just his fun.What did he come in for?—To talk and visit?Thought he’d just call to tell us it was snowing.If he thinks he is going to make our houseA halfway coffee house ’twixt town and nowhere——”“I thought you’d feel you’d been too much concerned.”“You think you haven’t been concerned yourself.”“If you mean he was inconsiderateTo rout us out to think for him at midnightAnd then take our advice no more than nothing,Why, I agree with you. But let’s forgive him.We’ve had a share in one night of his life.What’ll you bet he ever calls again?” 