 A noiseless patient spider,
I mark'd where on a little promontory it stood isolated,
Mark'd how to explore the vacant vast surrounding,
It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament, out of itself,
Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them.

And you O my soul where you stand,
Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space,
Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to connect them,
Till the bridge you will need be form'd, till the ductile anchor hold,
Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul.
 Centre of equal daughters, equal sons, 
All, all alike endear'd, grown, ungrown, young or old,
Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich, 
Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,
A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,
Chair'd in the adamant of Time.

 1

To think of time—of all that retrospection!   
To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward!   
   
Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?   
Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?   
Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?
   
Is to-day nothing? Is the beginningless past nothing?   
If the future is nothing, they are just as surely nothing.   
   
To think that the sun rose in the east! that men and women
   were flexible, real, alive! that everything was alive!   
To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor bear our
   part!   
To think that we are now here, and bear our part!
   
2

Not a day passes—not a minute or second, without an
   accouchement!   
Not a day passes—not a minute or second, without a corpse!   
   
The dull nights go over, and the dull days also,   
The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,   
The physician, after long putting off, gives the silent and terrible
   look for an answer,
The children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters
   are sent for,   
Medicines stand unused on the shelf—(the camphor-smell has
   long pervaded the rooms,)   
The faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying,   
The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,   
The breath ceases, and the pulse of the heart ceases,
The corpse stretches on the bed, and the living look upon it,   
It is palpable as the living are palpable.   
   
The living look upon the corpse with their eye-sight,   
But without eye-sight lingers a different living, and looks curiously
   on the corpse.   
   
3

To think the thought of Death, merged in the thought of materials! 
To think that the rivers will flow, and the snow fall, and fruits ripen,
   and act upon others as upon us now—yet not act upon us!   
To think of all these wonders of city and country, and others taking
   great interest in them—and we taking no interest in them!   
   
To think how eager we are in building our houses!   
To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite indifferent!   
   
(I see one building the house that serves him a few years, or seventy
   or eighty years at most,
I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.)   
   
Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole earth—they never
   cease—they are the burial lines,   
He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall
   surely be buried.   
   
4

A reminiscence of the vulgar fate,   
A frequent sample of the life and death of workmen,
Each after his kind:   
Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf—posh and ice in the river,
   half-frozen mud in the streets, a gray, discouraged sky overhead,
   the short, last daylight of Twelfth-month,   
A hearse and stages—other vehicles give place—the funeral
   of an old Broadway stage-driver, the cortege mostly drivers.   
   
Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the death-bell, the gate
   is pass'd, the new-dug grave is halted at, the living alight, the
   hearse uncloses,   
The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip is laid on the
   coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd in, 
The mound above is flatted with the spades—silence,   
A minute—no one moves or speaks—it is done,   
He is decently put away—is there anything more?   
   
He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd, not bad-looking,
   able to take his own part, witty, sensitive to a slight, ready with
   life or death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate hearty,
   drank hearty, had known what it was to be flush, grew low-spirited
   toward the last, sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution, died, aged
   forty-one years—and that was his funeral.   
   
Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves, strap, wet-weather
   clothes, whip carefully chosen, boss, spotter, starter, hostler,
   somebody loafing on you, you loafing on somebody, headway, man before
   and man behind, good day's work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean
   stock, first out, last out, turning-in at night;
To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers—and
   he there takes no interest in them!   
   
5

The markets, the government, the working-man's wages—to think what
   account they are through our nights and days!   
To think that other working-men will make just as great account of
   them—yet we make little or no account!   
   
The vulgar and the refined—what you call sin, and what you call
   goodness—to think how wide a difference!   
To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie beyond
   the difference.
   
To think how much pleasure there is!   
Have you pleasure from looking at the sky? have you pleasure from poems?   
Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or planning a
   nomination and election? or with your wife and family?   
Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the beautiful
   maternal cares?   
—These also flow onward to others—you and I flow onward, 
But in due time, you and I shall take less interest in them.   
   
Your farm, profits, crops,—to think how engross'd you are!   
To think there will still be farms, profits, crops—yet for you, of
   what avail?   
   
6

What will be, will be well—for what is, is well,   
To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.
   
The sky continues beautiful,   
The pleasure of men with women shall never be sated, nor the pleasure of
   women with men, nor the pleasure from poems,   
The domestic joys, the daily housework or business, the building of
   houses—these are not phantasms—they have weight, form,
   location;   
Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government, are none of them
   phantasms,   
The difference between sin and goodness is no delusion,
The earth is not an echo—man and his life, and all the things of
   his life, are well-consider'd.   
   
You are not thrown to the winds—you gather certainly and safely
   around yourself;   
Yourself! Yourself! Yourself, forever and ever!   
   
7

It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and
   father—it is to identify you;   
It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided;
Something long preparing and formless is arrived and form'd in you,   
You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.   
   
The threads that were spun are gather'd, the weft crosses the warp,
   the pattern is systematic.   
   
The preparations have every one been justified,   
The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments—the
   baton has given the signal.
   
The guest that was coming—he waited long, for reasons—he
   is now housed,   
He is one of those who are beautiful and happy—he is one of
   those that to look upon and be with is enough.   
   
The law of the past cannot be eluded,   
The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,   
The law of the living cannot be eluded—it is eternal,
The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded,   
The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,   
The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons—not one iota thereof
   can be eluded.   
   
8

Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,   
Northerner goes carried, and Southerner goes carried, and they on the
   Atlantic side, and they on the Pacific, and they between, and all
   through the Mississippi country, and all over the earth.
   
The great masters and kosmos are well as they go—the heroes and
   good-doers are well,   
The known leaders and inventors, and the rich owners and pious and
   distinguish'd, may be well,   
But there is more account than that—there is strict account
   of all.   
   
The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,   
The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,
The common people of Europe are not nothing—the American
   aborigines are not nothing,   
The infected in the immigrant hospital are not nothing—the
   murderer or mean person is not nothing,   
The perpetual successions of shallow people are not nothing as
   they go,   
The lowest prostitute is not nothing—the mocker of religion
   is not nothing as he goes.   
   
9

Of and in all these things,
I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so much, nor the law
   of us changed,   
I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present
   and past law,   
And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under the present
   and past law,   
For I have dream'd that the law they are under now is enough.   
   
If otherwise, all came but to ashes of dung,
If maggots and rats ended us, then Alarum! for we are betray'd!   
Then indeed suspicion of death.   
   
Do you suspect death? If I were to suspect death, I should die
   now,   
Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward
   annihilation?   
   
10

Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,
Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,   
The whole universe indicates that it is good,   
The past and the present indicate that it is good.   
   
How beautiful and perfect are the animals!   
How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!
   
What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad is just
   as perfect,   
The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the imponderable
   fluids are perfect;   
Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and slowly and surely
   they yet pass on.   
   
11

I swear I think now that everything without exception has an
   eternal Soul!   
The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of the sea have!
   the animals!
   
I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!   
That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is
   for it, and the cohering is for it;   
And all preparation is for it! and identity is for it! and life
   and materials are altogether for it!
 1Something startles me where I thought I was safest,I withdraw from the still woods I loved,I will not go now on the pastures to walk,I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my lover the sea,I will not touch my flesh to the earth as to other flesh to renew me.O how can it be that the ground itself does not sicken?How can you be alive you growths of spring?How can you furnish health you blood of herbs, roots, orchards, grain?Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses within you?Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead?Where have you disposed of their carcasses?Those drunkards and gluttons of so many generations?Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and meat?I do not see any of it upon you to-day, or perhaps I am deceiv'd,I will run a furrow with my plough, I will press my spade through the sod and turn it up underneath,I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.2Behold this compost! behold it well!Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick person—yet behold!The grass of spring covers the prairies,The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the garden,The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage out of its graves,The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mulberry-tree,The he-birds carol mornings and evenings while the she-birds sit on their nests,The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,The new-born of animals appear, the calf is dropt from the cow, the colt from the mare,Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark green leaves,Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk, the lilacs bloom in the dooryards,The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above all those strata of sour dead.What chemistry!That the winds are really not infectious,That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of the sea which is so amorous after me,That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all over with its tongues,That it will not endanger me with the fevers that have deposited themselves in it,That all is clean forever and forever,That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,That the fruits of the apple-orchard and the orange-orchard, that melons, grapes, peaches, plums, will   none of them poison me,That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any disease,Though probably every spear of grass rises out of what was once a catching disease.Now I am terrified at the Earth, it is that calm and patient,It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such endless successions of diseas'd corpses,It distills such exquisite winds out of such infused fetor,It renews with such unwitting looks its prodigal, annual, sumptuous crops,It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts such leavings from them at last.  1.OF the visages of things—And of piercing through         to the accepted hells beneath;Of ugliness—To me there is just as much in it as         there is in beauty—And now the ugliness of         human beings is acceptable to me;Of detected persons—To me, detected persons are         not, in any respect, worse than undetected per-         sons—and are not in any respect worse than I         am myself;Of criminals—To me, any judge, or any juror, is         equally criminal—and any reputable person is         also—and the President is also.2.OF waters, forests, hills;Of the earth at large, whispering through medium of         me;Of vista—Suppose some sight in arriere, through the         formative chaos, presuming the growth, fulness,         life, now attain'd on the journey;(But I see the road continued, and the journey ever         continued;)Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time         has become supplied—And of what will yet be         supplied,Because all I see and know, I believe to have purport         in what will yet be supplied.3.OF persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies,         wealth, scholarships, and the like;To me, all that those persons have arrived at, sinks         away from them, except as it results to their         Bodies and Souls,So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked;And often, to me, each one mocks the others, and         mocks himself or herself,And of each one, the core of life, namely happiness,         is full of the rotten excrement of maggots,And often, to me, those men and women pass unwit-         tingly the true realities of life, and go toward         false realities,And often, to me, they are alive after what custom has         served them, but nothing more,And often, to me, they are sad, hasty, unwaked son-         nambules, walking the dusk.4.OF ownership—As if one fit to own things could not         at pleasure enter upon all, and incorporate         them into himself or herself;Of Equality—As if it harm'd me, giving others the         same chances and rights as myself—As if it         were not indispensable to my own rights that         others possess the same;Of Justice—As if Justice could be anything but the         same ample law, expounded by natural judges         and saviors,As if it might be this thing or that thing, according         to decisions.5.As I sit with others, at a great feast, suddenly, while         the music is playing,To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral,         in mist, of a wreck at sea,Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations,         founder'd off the Northeast coast, and going         down—Of the steamship Arctic going down,Of the veil'd tableau—Women gather'd together on         deck, pale, heroic, waiting the moment that         draws so close—O the moment!O the huge sob—A few bubbles—the white foam         spirting up—And then the women gone,Sinking there, while the passionless wet flows on—         And I now pondering, Are those women indeed         gone?Are Souls drown'd and destroy'd so?Is only matter triumphant?6.OF what I write from myself—As if that were not the         resumé;Of Histories—As if such, however complete, were not         less complete than my poems;As if the shreds, the records of nations, could possibly         be as lasting as my poems;As if here were not the amount of all nations, and of         all the lives of heroes.7.OF obedience, faith, adhesiveness;As I stand aloof and look, there is to me something         profoundly affecting in large masses of men,         following the lead of those who do not believe         in men.  Sounds of the winter too,Sunshine upon the mountains—many a distant strainFrom cheery railroad train—from nearer field, barn, houseThe whispering air—even the mute crops, garner’d apples, corn,Children’s and women’s tones—rhythm of many a farmer and of      flail,And old man’s garrulous lips among the rest, Think not we give      out yet,Forth from these snowy hairs we keep up yet the lilt.  I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,
All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,
Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous leaves of dark green,
And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,
But I wonder’d how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there without its friend near, for I knew I could not,
And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it, and twined around it a little moss,
And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,
It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,
(For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)
Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;
For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana solitary in a wide flat space,
Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,
I know very well I could not.

 Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is always to come unfolded,   
Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the superbest man of the earth,   
Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,   
Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be form’d of perfect body, 
Unfolded only out of the inimitable poem of the woman can come the poems of man, (only thence have my poems come;)
Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I love, only thence can appear the strong and arrogant man I love,   
Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled woman I love, only thence come the brawny embraces of the man;   
Unfolded out of the folds of the woman’s brain come all the folds of the man’s brain, duly obedient,
Unfolded out of the justice of the woman all justice is unfolded,
Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all sympathy;
A man is a great thing upon the earth and through eternity, but every jot of the greatness of man is unfolded out of woman;
First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be shaped in himself.
 The world below the brine,   
Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves,   
Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick tangle, openings, and pink turf,   
Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the play of light through the water,   
Dumb swimmers there among the rocks,coral, gluten, grass, rushes, and the aliment of the swimmers,
Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling close to the bottom,   
The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting with his flukes,   
The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy sea-leopard, and the sting-ray,   
Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths, breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do,
The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed by beings like us who walk this sphere,
The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.
 Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,
Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,
Out of the Ninth-month midnight,
Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child leaving his bed wander'd alone, bareheaded, barefoot,
Down from the shower'd halo,
Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they were alive,
Out from the patches of briers and blackberries, 
From the memories of the bird that chanted to me, 
From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,
From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,
From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,
From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,
From the myriad thence-arous'd words,
From the word stronger and more delicious than any,
From such as now they start the scene revisiting,
As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,
Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,
A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,
Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,
I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,
Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,
A reminiscence sing.

Once Paumanok,
When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,
Up this seashore in some briers,
Two feather'd guests from Alabama, two together,
And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,
And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,
And every day the she-bird crouch'd on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,
And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing them,
Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.

Shine! shine! shine!
Pour down your warmth, great sun! 
While we bask, we two together.

Two together!
Winds blow south, or winds blow north,
Day come white, or niqht come black,
Home, or rivers and mountains from home,
Singing all time, minding no time,
While we two keep together.

Till of a sudden,
May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,
One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest, 
Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next, 
Nor ever appear'd again.

And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,
And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,
Over the hoarse surging of the sea,
Or flitting from brier to brier by day,
I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,
The solitary guest from Alabama.

Blow! blow! blow!
Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok's shore;
I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me.

Yes, when the stars glisten'd,
All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,
Down almost amid the slapping waves,
Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.

He call'd on his mate,
He pour'd forth the meanings which I of all men know.
Yes my brother I know,	
The rest might not, but I have treasur'd every note,
For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,
Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the 
   shadows,
Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds
   and sights after their sorts,
The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing, 
I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair, 
Listen'd long and long.

Listen'd to keep, to sing, now translating the notes, 
Following you my brother.

Soothe! soothe! soothe!
Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,	
And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,
But my love soothes not me, not me.	

Low hangs the moon, it rose late,
It is lagging—O I think it is heavy with love, with love.

O madly the sea pushes upon the land, 
With love, with love. 

O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers? 
What is that little black thing I see there in the white?

Loud! loud! loud!
Loud I call to you, my love!

Hiqh and clear I shoot my voice over the waves, 
Surely you must know who is here, is here, 
You must know who I am, my love.

Low-hanging moon!
What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?
O it is the shape, the shape of my mate!
O moon do not keep her from me any longer.

Land! land! O land!
Whichever way I turn, 0 I think you could give me my mate back again if you only would,
For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.

O rising stars!
Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you.

O throat! 0 trembling throat! 
Sound clearer through the atmosphere! 
Pierce the woods, the earth, 
Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want.

Shake out carols!
Solitary here, the niqht's carols! 
Carols of lonesome love! death's carols!
Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!
O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea! 
O reckless despairing carols.

But soft! sink low! 
Soft! let me just murmur, 
And do you wait a moment you husky-nois'd sea,
For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,
So faint, I must be still, be still to listen, 
But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me.

Hither my love! 
Here I am! here!
With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to you, 
This gentle call is for you my love, for you.

Do not be decoy'd elsewhere,
That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,
That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,
Those are the shadows of leaves.

O darkness! 0 in vain! 
0 I am very sick and sorrowful.
O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!
O troubled reflection in the sea!	
O throat! 0 throbbing heart!
And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.	

0 past! 0 happy life! 0 songs of joy!
In the air, in the woods, over fields,
Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!
But my mate no more, no more with me!
We two together no more.

The aria sinking,
All else continuing, the stars shining,
The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,
With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,
On the sands of Paumanok's shore gray and rustling,
The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of the sea almost touching,
The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the atmosphere dallying,
The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously bursting,
The aria's meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,
The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,
The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,
The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,
To the boy's soul's questions sullenly timing, some drown'd secret hissing,
To the outsetting bard.

Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)
Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?
For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping, now I have heard you,
Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,
And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder and more sorrowful than yours,
A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die. 

O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me, 
O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,
Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations, 
Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me, 
Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what there in the night,
By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon, 
The messenger there arous'd, the fire, the sweet hell within,
The unknown want, the destiny of me.

O give me the clew! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,) 
O if I am to have so much, let me have more!

A word then, (for I will conquer it,)
The word final, superior to all,
Subtle, sent up—what is it?—I listen;
Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?
Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?

Whereto answering, the sea, 
Delaying not, hurrying not, 
Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly before daybreak,
Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word death, 
And again death, death, death, death, 
Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous'd child's heart,
But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet, 
Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,
Death, death, death, death, death.

Which I do not forget, 
But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother, 
That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's gray beach,
With the thousand responsive songs at random, 
My own songs awaked from that hour,
And with them the key, the word up from the waves,
The word of the sweetest song and all songs,
That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,
(Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet garments, bending aside,)
The sea whisper'd me.
 Among the men and women the multitude,   
I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine signs,   
Acknowledging none else, not parent, wife, husband, brother, child, any nearer than I am,   
Some are baffled, but that one is not—that one knows me.   
   
Ah lover and perfect equal, 
I meant that you should discover me so by my faint indirections,   
And I when I meet you mean to discover you by the like in you.
 After surmounting threescore and ten,With all their chances, changes, losses, sorrows,My parents' deaths, the vagaries of my life, the many tearing passions of me, the war of '63 and '4,As some old broken soldier, after a long, hot, wearying march, or haply after battle,To-day at twilight, hobbling, answering company roll-call, Here, with vital voice,Reporting yet, saluting yet the Officer over all.            (From a talk I had lately with a German spiritualist.)

Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost,
No birth, identity, form—no object of the world.
Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;
Appearance must not foil, nor shifted sphere confuse thy brain.
Ample are time and space—ample the fields of Nature.
The body, sluggish, aged, cold—the embers left from earlier fires,
The light in the eye grown dim, shall duly flame again;
The sun now low in the west rises for mornings and for noons continual;
To frozen clods ever the spring's invisible law returns,
With grass and flowers and summer fruits and corn.
 Written in Platte Cañon, Colorado.
Spirit that form'd this scene,
These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,
These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,
These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,

These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,
I know thee, savage spirit—we have communed together,
Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;
Was't charged against my chants they had forgotten art?
To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse?
The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace—column and polish'd arch forgot?
But thou that revelest here—spirit that form'd this scene,
They have remember'd thee.
 Thee for my recitative,
Thee in the driving storm even as now, the snow, the winter-day declining,	 
Thee in thy panoply, thy measur'd dual throbbing and thy beat convulsive,	 
Thy black cylindric body, golden brass, and silvery steel,
Thy ponderous side-bars, parallel and connecting rods, gyrating, shuttling at thy sides,         
Thy metrical, now swelling pant and roar, now tapering in the distance,	 
Thy great protruding head-light fix’d in front,	 
Thy long, pale, floating vapor-pennants, tinged with delicate purple,	 
The dense and murky clouds out-belching from thy smoke-stack,
Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of thy wheels,	  
Thy train of cars behind, obedient, merrily following,	 
Through gale or calm, now swift, now slack, yet steadily careering; 
Type of the modern—emblem of motion and power—pulse of the continent,
For once come serve the Muse and merge in verse, even as here I see thee,
With storm and buffeting gusts of wind and falling snow,	  
By day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes,	
By night thy silent signal lamps to swing.	 
  
Fierce-throated beauty!	 
Roll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy swinging lamps at night,
Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an earthquake, rousing all,
Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,
(No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)
Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills return’d,	
Launch’d o’er the prairies wide, across the lakes,	
To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.

 Delicate cluster! flag of teeming life!   
Covering all my lands —all my sea-shores lining!   
Flag of death! (how I watch'd you through the smoke of battle pressing!   
How I heard you flap and rustle, cloth defiant!)   
Flag cerulean— sunny flag, with the orbs of night dappled!
Ah my silvery beauty— ah my woolly white and crimson!   
Ah to sing the song of you, my matron mighty!   
My sacred one, my mother.
 Spontaneous me, Nature,   
The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am happy with,   
The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,   
The hill-side whiten’d with blossoms of the mountain ash,   
The same late in autumn, the hues of red, yellow, drab, purple, and light and dark green,
The rich coverlet of the grass, animals and birds, the private untrimm’d bank, the primitive apples, the pebble-stones,   
Beautiful dripping fragments, the negligent list of one after another, as I happen to call them to me or think of them,   
The real poems, (what we call poems being merely pictures,)   
The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men like me,   
This poem drooping shy and unseen that I always carry, and that all men carry,
(Know once for all, avow’d on purpose, wherever are men like me, are our lusty lurking masculine poems,)   
Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding, love-climbers, and the climbing sap,   
Arms and hands of love, lips of love, phallic thumb of love, breasts of love, bellies press’d and glued together with love,   
Earth of chaste love, life that is only life after love,   
The body of my love, the body of the woman I love, the body of the man, the body of the earth,
Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,   
The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and down, that gripes the full-grown lady-flower, curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes his will of her, and holds himself tremulous and tight till he is satisfied,   
The wet of woods through the early hours,   
Two sleepers at night lying close together as they sleep, one with an arm slanting down across and below the waist of the other,   
The smell of apples, aromas from crush’d sage-plant, mint, birch-bark,
The boy’s longings, the glow and pressure as he confides to me what he was dreaming,   
The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl, and falling still and content to the ground,   
The no-form’d stings that sights, people, objects, sting me with,   
The hubb’d sting of myself, stinging me as much as it ever can any one,   
The sensitive, orbic, underlapp’d brothers, that only privileged feelers may be intimate where they are,
The curious roamer, the hand roaming all over the body, the bashful withdrawing of flesh where the fingers soothingly pause and edge themselves,   
The limpid liquid within the young man,   
The vexed corrosion so pensive and so painful,   
The torment, the irritable tide that will not be at rest,   
The like of the same I feel, the like of the same in others,
The young man that flushes and flushes, and the young woman that flushes and flushes,   
The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to repress what would master him, The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats,   
The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers, the young man all color’d,red, ashamed, angry;   
The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing and naked,
The merriment of the twin babes that crawl over the grass in the sun, the mother never turning her vigilant eyes from them,   
The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening or ripen’d long-round walnuts,    
The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,   
The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find myself indecent, while birds and animals never once skulk or find themselves indecent,   
The great chastity of paternity, to match the great chastity of maternity,
The oath of procreation I have sworn, my Adamic and fresh daughters,   
The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through,   
The wholesome relief, repose, content,    
And this bunch pluck’d at random from myself,   
It has done its work—I tossed it carelessly to fall where it may. 

 I was asking for something specific and perfect for my city, 
Whereupon lo! upsprang the aboriginal name.

Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid, sane, unruly, musical, self-sufficient,
I see that the word of my city is that word from of old, 
Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays, superb,
Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and steamships, an island sixteen miles long, solid-founded,
Numberless crowded streets, high growths of iron, slender, strong, light, splendidly uprising toward clear skies,
Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sundown, 
The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger adjoining islands, the heights, the villas,
The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd,
The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of business, the houses of business of the ship-merchants and money-brokers, the river-streets,
Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a week, 
The carts hauling goods, the manly race of drivers of horses, the brown-faced sailors,
The summer air, the bright sun shining, and the sailing clouds aloft,
The winter snows, the sleigh-bells, the broken ice in the river, passing along up or down with the flood-tide or ebb-tide,
The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd, beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the eyes,
Trottoirs throng'd, vehicles, Broadway, the women, the shops and shows,
A million people—manners free and superb—open voices—hospitality—the most courageous and friendly young men,
City of hurried and sparkling waters! city of spires and masts! 
City nested in bays! my city!
 A woman waits for me, she contains all, nothing is lacking,
Yet all were lacking if sex were lacking, or if the moisture of the right man were lacking.

Sex contains all, bodies, souls, 
Meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies, results, promulgations,
Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery, the seminal milk,
All hopes, benefactions, bestowals, all the passions, loves, beauties, delights of the earth,
All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of the earth,
These are contain'd in sex as parts of itself and justifications of itself.
   
Without shame the man I like knows and avows the deliciousness of his sex,
Without shame the woman I like knows and avows hers.

Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women, 
I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with those women that are warm-blooded and sufficient for me,
I see that they understand me and do not deny me,
I see that they are worthy of me, I will be the robust husband of those women.
   
They are not one jot less than I am,
They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and blowing winds, 
Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,
They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike, retreat, advance, resist, defend themselves,
They are ultimate in their own right—they are calm, clear, well-possess'd of themselves.
   
I draw you close to me, you women,
I cannot let you go, I would do you good, 
I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our own sake, but for others' sakes,
Envelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,
They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me. 

It is I, you women, I make my way,
I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable, but I love you,
I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,
I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for these States, I press with slow rude muscle,
I brace myself effectually, I listen to no entreaties,
I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long accumulated within me. 
   
Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself, 
In you I wrap a thousand onward years, 
On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me and America,
The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and athletic girls, new artists, musicians, and singers, 
The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in their turn,
I shall demand perfect men and women out of my love-spendings,
I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I and you interpenetrate now,
I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of them, as I count on the fruits of the gushing showers I give now,
I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death, immortality, I plant so lovingly now.
 
 If I should need to name, O Western World, your powerfulest scene and show,'Twould not be you, Niagara—nor you, ye limitless prairies—nor your huge rifts of canyons, Colorado,Nor you, Yosemite—nor Yellowstone, with all its spasmic geyser-loops ascending to the skies, appearing and disappearing,Nor Oregon's white cones—nor Huron's belt of mighty lakes—nor Mississippi's stream:—This seething hemisphere's humanity, as now, I'd name—the still small voice vibrating—America's choosing day,(The heart of it not in the chosen—the act itself the main, the quadriennial choosing,)The stretch of North and South arous'd—sea-board and inland—Texas to Maine—the Prairie States—Vermont, Virginia, California,The final ballot-shower from East to West—the paradox and conflict,The countless snow-flakes falling—(a swordless conflict,Yet more than all Rome's wars of old, or modern Napoleon's:) the peaceful choice of all,Or good or ill humanity—welcoming the darker odds, the dross:—Foams and ferments the wine? it serves to purify—while the heart pants, life glows:These stormy gusts and winds waft precious ships,Swell'd Washington's, Jefferson's, Lincoln's sails.  Who has gone farthest? for I would go farther,And who has been just? for I would be the most just person of the earth,And who most cautious? for I would be more cautious,And who has been happiest? O I think it is I—I think no one was ever happier than I,And who has lavish'd all? for I lavish constantly the best I have,And who proudest? for I think I have reason to be the proudest son alive—for I am the son of the brawny and tall-topt city,And who has been bold and true? for I would be the boldest and truest being of the universe,And who benevolent? for I would show more benevolence than all the rest,And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends? for I know what it is to receive the passionate love of many friends,And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body? for I do not believe any one possesses a more perfect or enamour'd body than mine,And who thinks the amplest thoughts? for I would surround those thoughts,And who has made hymns fit for the earth? for I am mad with devouring ecstasy to make joyous hymns for the whole earth.  1

Singing my days,   
Singing the great achievements of the present,   
Singing the strong light works of engineers,   
Our modern wonders, (the antique ponderous Seven outvied,)   
In the Old World the east the Suez canal,
The New by its mighty railroad spann’d,   
The seas inlaid with eloquent gentle wires;   
Yet first to sound, and ever sound, the cry with thee O soul,   
The Past! the Past! the Past!   
   
The Past— the dark unfathom’d retrospect!
The teeming gulf—the sleepers and the shadows!   
The past—the infinite greatness of the past!   
For what is the present after all but a growth out of the past?   
(As a projectile, form’d, impell’d, passing a certain line, still keeps on,   
So the present, utterly form’d, impell’d by the past.)


2

Passage O soul to India!   
Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.   
   
Not you alone proud truths of the world!   
Nor you alone ye facts of modern science,   
But myths and fables of eld, Asia’s, Africa’s fables,
The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos’d dreams!   
The deep diving bibles and legends,   
The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;   
O you temples fairer than lilies pour’d over by the rising sun!   
O you fables spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known, mounting to heaven!
You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish’d with gold!   
Towers of fables immortal fashion’d from mortal dreams!   
You too I welcome and fully the same as the rest!   
You too with joy I sing.   

Passage to India! 
Lo, soul, seest thou not God’s purpose from the first?   
The earth to be spann’d, connected by network,     
The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,   
The oceans to be cross’d, the distant brought near,  
The lands to be welded together.   
   
A worship new I sing,  
You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,   
You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,    
You, not for trade or transportation only,  
But in God’s name, and for thy sake O soul.   
  
 
3

Passage to India!   
Lo soul for thee of tableaus twain,   
I see in one the Suez canal initiated, open’d,   
I see the procession of steamships, the Empress Eugenie’s leading the van,   
I mark, from on deck the strange landscape, the pure sky, the level sand in the distance,    
I pass swiftly the picturesque groups, the workmen gather’d,   
The gigantic dredging machines.   
   
In one again, different, (yet thine, all thine, O soul, the same,)   
I see over my own continent the Pacific Railroad, surmounting every barrier, 
I see continual trains of cars winding along the Platte, carrying freight and passengers,    
I hear the locomotives rushing and roaring, and the shrill steam-whistle,   
I hear the echoes reverberate through the grandest scenery in the world,   
I cross the Laramie plains, I note the rocks in grotesque shapes, the buttes,    
I see the plentiful larkspur and wild onions, the barren, colorless, sage-deserts, 
I see in glimpses afar or towering immediately above me the great mountains, I see the Wind River and the Wahsatch mountains,    
I see the Monument mountain and the Eagle’s Nest, I pass the Promontory, I ascend the Nevadas,   
I scan the noble Elk mountain and wind around its base,    
I see the Humboldt range, I thread the valley and cross the river,   
I see the clear waters of Lake Tahoe, I see forests of majestic pines,
Or crossing the great desert, the alkaline plains, I behold enchanting mirages of waters and meadows,    
Marking through these and after all, in duplicate slender lines,   
Bridging the three or four thousand miles of land travel,   
Tying the Eastern to the Western sea,   
The road between Europe and Asia.
   
(Ah Genoese thy dream! thy dream!   
Centuries after thou art laid in thy grave,   
The shore thou foundest verifies thy dream.)   
 
  
4

Passage to India!   
Struggles of many a captain, tales of many a sailor dead,
Over my mood stealing and spreading they come,   
Like clouds and cloudlets in the unreach’d sky.   
   
Along all history, down the slopes,   
As a rivulet running, sinking now, and now again to the surface rising,   
A ceaseless thought, a varied train—lo, soul, to thee, thy sight, they rise,
The plans, the voyages again, the expeditions;   
Again Vasco de Gama sails forth,   
Again the knowledge gain’d, the mariner’s compass,   
Lands found and nations born, thou born America,   
For purpose vast, man’s long probation fill’d,
Thou, rondure of the world at last accomplish’d.   
  
 
5

O vast Rondure, swimming in space,    
Cover’d all over with visible power and beauty,   
Alternate light and day, and the teeming spiritual darkness,   
Unspeakable high processions of sun and moon and countless stars above,
Below, the manifold grass and waters, animals, mountains, trees,   
With inscrutable purpose, some hidden prophetic intention,   
Now first it seems my thought begins to span thee.   
   
Down from the gardens of Asia descending radiating,   
Adam and Eve appear, then their myriad progeny after them,
Wandering, yearning, curious, with restless explorations,   
With questionings, baffled, formless, feverish, with never-happy hearts,   
With that sad, incessant refrain, Wherefore, unsatisfied soul? and Whither O mocking life?   
   
Ah who shall soothe these feverish children?   
Who justify these restless explorations?
Who speak the secret of impassive earth?   
Who bind it to us? What is this separate Nature, so unnatural?   
What is this earth, to our affections? (unloving earth, without a throb to answer ours,    
Cold earth, the place of graves.)   
   
Yet soul be sure the first intent remains, and shall be carried out, 
Perhaps even now the time has arrived.   
   
After the seas are all cross’d, (as they seem already cross’d,)   
After the great captains and engineers have accomplish’d their work,   
After the noble inventors, after the scientists, the chemist, the geologist, ethnologist,   
Finally shall come the poet worthy that name, 
The true Son of God shall come singing his songs.   
   
Then not your deeds only O voyagers, O scientists and inventors, shall be justified,   
All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth’d,   
All affection shall be fully responded to, the secret shall be told,    
All these separations and gaps shall be taken up and hook’d and link’d together,  
The whole earth, this cold, impassive, voiceless earth, shall be completely justified,    
Trinitas divine shall be gloriously accomplish’d and compacted by the true son of God, the poet,   
(He shall indeed pass the straits and conquer the mountains,   
He shall double the Cape of Good Hope to some purpose,)   
Nature and Man shall be disjoin’d and diffused no more,
The true son of God shall absolutely fuse them.   
   

6

Year at whose wide-flung door I sing!   
Year of the purpose accomplish’d!   
Year of the marriage of continents, climates and oceans!   
(No mere doge of Venice now wedding the Adriatic,) 
I see, O year in you the vast terraqueous globe given and giving all,   
Europe to Asia, Africa join’d, and they to the New World,    
The lands, geographies, dancing before you, holding a festival garland,   
As brides and bridegrooms hand in hand.   
   
Passage to India!
Cooling airs from Caucasus far, soothing cradle of man,   
The river Euphrates flowing, the past lit up again.   
   
Lo soul, the retrospect brought forward,    
The old, most populous, wealthiest of earth’s lands,   
The streams of the Indus and the Ganges, and their many affluents, 
(I my shores of America walking to-day behold, resuming all,)   
The tale of Alexander, on his warlike marches suddenly dying,   
On one side China and on the other side Persia and Arabia,   
To the south the great seas and the Bay of Bengal,   
The flowing literatures, tremendous epics, religions, castes,
Old occult Brahma interminably far back, the tender and junior Buddha,   
Central and southern empires and all their belongings, possessors,   
The wars of Tamerlane, the reign of Aurungzebe,   
The traders, rulers, explorers, Moslems, Venetians, Byzantium, the Arabs, Portuguese,   
The first travelers famous yet, Marco Polo, Batouta the Moor,
Doubts to be solv’d, the map incognita, blanks to be fill’d,   
The foot of man unstay’d, the hands never at rest,   
Thyself O soul that will not brook a challenge.   
  
The medieval navigators rise before me,   
The world of 1492, with its awaken’d enterprise,
Something swelling in humanity now like the sap of the earth in spring,   
The sunset splendor of chivalry declining.   
   
And who art thou, sad shade?   
Gigantic, visionary, thyself a visionary,   
With majestic limbs, and pious beaming eyes, 
Spreading around, with every look of thine, a golden world,   
Enhuing it with gorgeous hues.   
   
As the chief histrion,   
Down to the footlights walks in some great scena,   
Dominating the rest I see the Admiral himself, 
(History’s type of courage, action, faith,)   
Behold him sail from Palos leading his little fleet,   
His voyage behold, his return, his great fame,   
His misfortunes, calumniators, behold him a prisoner, chain’d,   
Behold his dejection, poverty, death.
   
(Curious in time, I stand, noting the efforts of heroes,    
Is the deferment long? bitter the slander, poverty, death?   
Lies the seed unreck’d for centuries in the ground? lo, to God’s due occasion,   
Uprising in the night, it sprouts, blooms,   
And fills the earth with use and beauty.)  
   

7

Passage indeed O soul to primal thought,   
Not lands and seas alone, thy own clear freshness,   
The young maturity of brood and bloom,    
To realms of budding bibles.   
   
O soul, repressless, I with thee and thou with me, 
Thy circumnavigation of the world begin,    
Of man, the voyage of his mind’s return,   
To reason’s early paradise,   
Back, back to wisdom’s birth, to innocent intuitions,   
Again with fair creation.  
   

8

O we can wait no longer,    
We too take ship O soul,   
Joyous we too launch out on trackless seas,   
Fearless for unknown shores on waves of ecstasy to sail,   
Amid the wafting winds, (thou pressing me to thee, I thee to me, O soul,) 
Caroling free, singing our song of God,   
Chanting our chant of pleasant exploration.   
   
With laugh, and many a kiss,   
(Let others deprecate, let others weep for sin, remorse, humiliation,)   
O soul, thou pleasest me, I thee. 
   
Ah more than any priest O soul we too believe in God,   
But with the mystery of God we dare not dally.   
   
O soul thou pleasest me, I thee,    
Sailing these seas or on the hills, or waking in the night,   
Thoughts, silent thoughts, of Time and Space and Death, like waters flowing,
Bear me indeed as through the regions infinite,   
Whose air I breathe, whose ripples hear, lave me all over,    
Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,   
I and my soul to range in range of thee.   
   
O Thou transcendant, 
Nameless, the fibre and the breath,    
Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them,    
Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving,    
Thou moral, spiritual fountain— affection’s source— thou reservoir,   
(O pensive soul of me— O thirst unsatisfied— waitest not there? 
Waitest not haply for us somewhere there the Comrade perfect?)   
Thou pulse— thou motive of the stars, suns, systems,   
That, circling, move in order, safe, harmonious,   
Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of space,   
How should I think, how breathe a single breath, how speak, if, out of myself,
I could not launch, to those, superior universes?   
   
Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,   
At Nature and its wonders, Time and Space and Death,   
But that I, turning, call to thee O soul, thou actual Me,   
And lo, thou gently masterest the orbs,
Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,   
And fillest, swellest full the vastnesses of Space.   
   
Greater than stars or suns,   
Bounding O soul thou journeyest forth;   
What love than thine and ours could wider amplify? 
What aspirations, wishes, outvie thine and ours, O soul?   
What dreams of the ideal? what plans of purity, perfection, strength?   
What cheerful willingness for others’ sake, to give up all?   
For others’ sake to suffer all?   
   
Reckoning ahead O soul, when thou, the time achiev’d,
The seas all cross’d, weather’d the capes, the voyage done,   
Surrounded, copest, frontest God, yieldest, the aim attain’d,   
As fill’d with friendship, love complete, the Elder Brother found,   
The Younger melts in fondness in his arms.   
   

9

Passage to more than India!
Are thy wings plumed indeed for such far flights?   
O Soul, voyagest thou indeed on voyages like these?   
Disportest thou on waters such as those?   
Soundest below the Sanscrit and the Vedas?   
Then have thy bent unleash’d.
   
Passage to you, your shores, ye aged fierce enigmas!   
Passage to you, to mastership of you, ye strangling problems!   
You, strew’d with the wrecks of skeletons, that, living, never reach’d you.   

Passage to more than India!   
O secret of the earth and sky! 
Of you O waters of the sea! O winding creeks and rivers!   
Of you O woods and fields! Of you strong mountains of my land!   
Of you O prairies! of you, gray rocks!   
O morning red! O clouds! O rain and snows!   
O day and night, passage to you!
   
O sun and moon, and all you stars! Sirius and Jupiter!   
Passage to you!   
   
Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!   
Away O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!   
Cut the hawsers—haul out—shake out every sail! 
Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?   
Have we not grovell’d here long enough, eating and drinking like mere brutes?   
Have we not darken’d and dazed ourselves with books long enough?   
   
Sail forth— steer for the deep waters only,    
Reckless O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me, 
For we are bound where mariner has not yet dared to go,   
And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.   
   
O my brave soul!   
O farther farther sail!   
O daring joy, but safe! are they not all the seas of God? 
O farther, farther, farther sail!
 Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete, 
And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.

Lo, 'tis autumn, 
Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,
Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the moderate wind,
Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd vines,
(Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?
Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)

Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and with wondrous clouds,
Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.

Down in the fields all prospers well,
But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call,
And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.

Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,
She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.

Open the envelope quickly,
O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,
O a strange hand writes for our dear son, 0 stricken mother's soul!
All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main words only,
Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish, taken to hospital,
At present low, but will soon be better.

Ah now the single figure to me,
Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,
Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint, 
By the jamb of a door leans.

Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter speaks through her sobs,
The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd,)
See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.
Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be better, that brave and simple soul,)
While they stand at home at the door he is dead already, 
The only son is dead.

But the mother needs to be better, 
She with thin form presently drest in black, 
By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,
In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,
O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,
To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.
 Out of the rolling ocean, the crowd, came a drop gently to me,
Whispering I love you, before long I die,
I have travel'd a long way, merely to look on you to touch you,
For I could not die till I once look'd on you,
For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.

Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe,
Return in peace to the ocean my love,
I too am part of that ocean, my love, we are not so much separated,
Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect!
But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us,
As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever;
Be not impatient—a little space—know you I salute the air, the ocean and the land,
Every day at sundown for your dear sake my love.
 1An old man bending I come among new faces,Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,(Arous'd and angry, I'd thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,But soon my fingers fail'd me, my face droop'd and I resign'd myself,To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?2O maidens and young men I love and that love me,What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the rush of successful charge,Enter the captur'd works—yet lo, like a swift running river they fade,Pass and are gone they fade—I dwell not on soldiers' perils or soldier's joys,(Both I remember well—many of the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)But in silence, in dreams' projections,While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,Straight and swift to my wounded I go,Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,Where their priceless blood reddens the grass the ground,Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd again.I onward go, I stop,With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,One turns to me his appealing eyes—poor boy! I never knew you,Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that would save you.3On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through I examine,Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life struggles hard,(Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!In mercy come quickly.)From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side falling head,His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the bloody stump,And has not yet look'd on it.I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,And the yellow-blue countenance see.I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening, so offensive,While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.I am faithful, I do not give out,The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast a fire, a burning flame.)4Thus in silence in dreams' projections,Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,(Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have cross'd and rested,Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)  Whoever you are holding me now in hand,   
Without one thing all will be useless,   
I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,   
I am not what you supposed, but far different.   
   
Who is he that would become my follower? 
Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?   
   
The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,   
You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your sole and exclusive standard,   
Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,   
The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives around you would have to be abandon'd, 
Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let go your hand from my shoulders,   
Put me down, and depart on your way.   
   
Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,   
Or back of a rock in the open air,   
(For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not, nor in company, 
And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)   
But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any person for miles around approach unawares,   
Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or some quiet island,   
Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,   
With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss or the new husband's kiss, 
For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.   
   
Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,   
Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,   
Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;   
For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,
And thus touching you, would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.   
   
But these leaves conning you con at peril,   
For these leaves and me you will not understand,   
They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will certainly elude you,   
Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!
Already you see I have escaped from you.   
   
For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,   
Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,   
Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,   
Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few,) prove victorious,
Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil, perhaps more,    
For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times and not hit, that which I hinted at;   
Therefore release me and depart on your way.
 To conclude, I announce what comes after me.  
   
I remember I said before my leaves sprang at all,   
I would raise my voice jocund and strong with reference to consummations.   
   
When America does what was promis’d,  
When through These States walk a hundred millions of superb persons,   
When the rest part away for superb persons and contribute to them,   
When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America,   
Then to me and mine our due fruition.
   
I have press’d through in my own right,   
I have sung the body and the soul, war and peace have I sung, and the songs of life and death, 
And the songs of birth, and shown that there are many births. 

I have offer’d my style to everyone, I have journey’d with confident step;   
While my pleasure is yet at the full I whisper So long! 
And take the young woman’s hand and the young man’s hand for the last time.   
     
I announce natural persons to arise,    
I announce justice triumphant,   
I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,    
I announce the justification of candor and the justification of pride.
   
I announce that the identity of These States is a single identity only,   
I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble,   
I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics of the earth insignificant.   
   
I announce adhesiveness, I say it shall be limitless, unloosen’d,   
I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for.
   
I announce a man or woman coming, perhaps you are the one, (So long!)   
I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste, affectionate, compassionate, fully arm'd.   
   
I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold,    
I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation. 
   
I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded, 
I announce a race of splendid and savage old men.   
   
O thicker and faster—(So long!)   
O crowding too close upon me,    
I foresee too much, it means more than I thought,   
It appears to me I am dying.
   
Hasten throat and sound your last,   
Salute me—salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more.   
   
Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,   
At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing,   
Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,
Curious envelop’d messages delivering,   
Sparkles hot, seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping,   
Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring,   
To ages and ages yet the growth of the seed leaving,   
To troops out of the war arising, they the tasks I have set promulging,  
To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing, their affection me more clearly explaining,  
To young men my problems offering—no dallier I—I the muscle of their brains trying,   
So I pass, a little time vocal, visible, contrary,    
Afterward a melodious echo, passionately bent for, (death making me really undying,)   
The best of me then when no longer visible, for toward that I have been incessantly preparing.
   
What is there more, that I lag and pause, and crouch extended with unshut mouth?   
Is there a single final farewell?   
   
My songs cease, I abandon them,    
From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally solely to you.   
   
Camerado, this is no book, 
Who touches this touches a man,   
(Is it night? are we here together alone?)   
It is I you hold and who holds you,   
I spring from the pages into your arms—decease calls me forth.   
   
O how your fingers drowse me, 
Your breath falls around me like dew, your pulse lulls the tympans of my ears,    
I feel immerged from head to foot;   
Delicious, enough.   
   
Enough O deed impromptu and secret,  
Enough O gliding present—enough, O summ’d-up past. 
   
Dear friend whoever you are take this kiss,   
I give it especially to you, do not forget me,    
I feel like one who has done work for the day to retire awhile,   
I receive now again of my many translations, from my avataras ascending, while others doubtless await me,    
An unknown sphere more real than I dream’d, more direct, darts awakening rays about me, So long!
Remember my words, I may again return,   
I love you, I depart from materials,    
I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead. 

 I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,And you must not be abased to the other.Loafe with me on the grass,  loose the stop from your throat,Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not even the best,Only the lull I like, the hum of your valvèd voice.I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning, How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my bare-stript heart,And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the earth,And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,And that all the men ever born are also my brothers,  and the women my sisters and lovers,And that a kelson of the creation is love,And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and poke-weed.  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,
Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;
Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.

She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,
She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.

Which of the young men does she like the best?
Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.

Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,
You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.

Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,
The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.

The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,
Little streams pass'd over their bodies.

An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,
It descended trembling from their temples and ribs.

The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,
They do not know who puffs and declines with the pendant and bending arch,
They do not think whom they souse with spray.
 Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with perfumes,I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the distillation, it is odorless,It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,I am mad for it to be in contact with me.The smoke of my own breath,Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing of blood and air through my lungs,The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of the wind,A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields and hill-sides,The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising from bed and meeting the sun.

Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of all poems,You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions of suns left,)You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me, he complains of my gab and my loitering.I too am not a bit tamed, I too am untranslatable,I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.The last scud of day holds back for me,It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadow'd wilds,It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,And filter and fibre your blood.Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,Missing me one place search another,I stop somewhere waiting for you.  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green stuff woven.Or I guess if is the handkerchief of the Lord,A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see and remark, and say Whose?Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,Growing among black folks as among white,Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I receive them the same.And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.Tenderly will I use you curling grass,It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken,It may be if I had known them I would have loved them, soon out of their mothers' laps,And here you are the mothers' laps.This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,Darker than the colorless beards of old men,Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing. I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken soon out of their laps.What do you think has become of the young and old men?And what do you think has become of the women and children?They are alive and well somewhere,The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the end to arrest it,And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.  I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured and never will be measured.I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,My left hand hooking you round the waist,My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,You must travel it for yourself.It is not far, it is within reach,Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.Shoulder your duds dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth,Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand on my hip,And in due time you shall repay the same service to me,For after we start we never lie by again.This day before dawn I ascended a hill and look'd at the crowded heaven,And I said to my spirit When we become the enfolders of those orbs, and the pleasure and knowledge of every thing in them, shall we be fill'd and satisfied then?And my spirit said No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond.You are also asking me questions and I hear you,I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.Sit a while dear son,Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.Long enough have you dream'd contemptible dreams,Now I wash the gum from your eyes,You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every moment of your life.Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout, and laughingly dash with your hair.  I am the teacher of athletes,He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power, but in his own right,Wicked rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts,First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's eye, to sail a skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,Preferring scars and the beard and faces pitted with small-pox over all latherers,And those well-tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,My words itch at your ears till you understand them.I do not say these things for a dollar or to fill up the time while I wait for a boat,(It is you talking just as much as myself, I act as the tongue of you,Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.)I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house,And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her who privately stays with me in the open air.If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves a key,The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,But roughs and little children better than they.The young mechanic is closest to me, he knows me well,The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with him all day,The farm-boy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,In vessels that sail my words sail, I go with fishermen and seamen and love them.The soldier camp'd or upon the march is mine,On the night ere the pending battle many seek me, and I do not fail them,On that solemn night (it may be their last) those that know me seek me.My face rubs to the hunter's face when he lies down alone in his blanket,The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,The young mother and old mother comprehend me,The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,They and all would resume what I have told them.  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to try to alarm me.To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,I see the elder-hand pressing receiving supporting,I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.And as to you Corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not offend me,I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,I reach to the leafy lips, I reach to the polish'd breasts of melons.And as to you Life I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths,(No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.)I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,O suns—O grass of graves—O perpetual transfers and promotions,If you do not say any thing how can I say any thing?Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,Toss, sparkles of day and dusk—toss on the black stems that decay in the muck,Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night,I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected,And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.  

There is that in me—I do not know what it is—but I know it is in me.Wrench'd and sweaty—calm and cool then my body becomes,I sleep—I sleep long.I do not know it—it is without name—it is a word unsaid,It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.Do you see O my brothers and sisters?It is not chaos or death—it is form, union, plan—it is eternal life—it is Happiness.  The past and present wilt—I have fill'd them, emptied them.And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.Listener up there! what have you to confide to me?Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,(Talk honestly, no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.)Do I contradict myself?Very well then I contradict myself,(I am large, I contain multitudes.)I concentrate toward them that are nigh, I wait on the door-slab.Who has done his day's work? who will soonest be through with his supper?Who wishes to walk with me?Will you speak before I am gone? will you prove already too late?  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?
I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.

I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and am not contain'd between my hat and boots,
And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,
The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.

I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,
I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and fathomless as myself,
(They do not know how immortal, but I know.)

Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,
For me those that have been boys and that love women,
For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,
For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the mothers of mothers,
For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,
For me children and the begetters of children.

Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,
I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,
And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.

 The little one sleeps in its cradle,
I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies with my hand.

The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,
I peeringly view them from the top.

The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,
I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol has fallen.


The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of the promenaders,
The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,
The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,
The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,
The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,
The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,
The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his passage to the centre of the crowd,
The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,
What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,
What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and give birth to babes,
What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls restrain'd by decorum,
Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances, rejections with convex lips,
I mind them or the show or resonance of them—I come and I depart.

 The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,
The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,
The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,
The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.

I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,
I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,
I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,
And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.

 The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife at the stall in the market,
I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.

Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,
Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in the fire.

From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,
The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,
Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,
They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.

 The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,
Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,
The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,
Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.

The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the chickadee, the prairie-dog,
The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,
The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,
I see in them and myself the same old law.

The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,
They scorn the best I can do to relate them.

I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,
Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,
Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and mauls, and the drivers of horses,
I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.

What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,
Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,
Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,
Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,
Scattering it freely forever.

 I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,
Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,
Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff that is fine,
One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the largest the same,
A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and hospitable down by the Oconee I live,
A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,
A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,
A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;
At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen off Newfoundland,
At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,
At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the Texan ranch,
Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving their big proportions,)
Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands and welcome to drink and meat,
A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,
A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,
Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,
A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,
Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.

I resist any thing better than my own diversity,
Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,
And am not stuck up, and am in my place.

(The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,
The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,
The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)

 These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they are not original with me,
If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,
If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,
If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.

This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,
This the common air that bathes the globe.

 With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,
I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for conquer'd and slain persons.

Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?
I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.

I beat and pound for the dead,
I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.

Vivas to those who have fail'd!
And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!
And to those themselves who sank in the sea!
And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!
And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!

 This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,
It is for the wicked just the same as the righteous, I make appointments with all,
I will not have a single person slighted or left away,
The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,
The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;
There shall be no difference between them and the rest.

This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,
This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,
This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,
This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.

Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?
Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the side of a rock has.

Do you take it I would astonish?
Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering through the woods?
Do I astonish more than they?

This hour I tell things in confidence,
I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.

 Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;
How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?

What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?

All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,
Else it were time lost listening to me.

I do not snivel that snivel the world over,
That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.

Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity goes to the fourth-remov'd,
I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.

Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?

Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with doctors and calculated close,
I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.

In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,
And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.

I know I am solid and sound,
To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,
All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.

I know I am deathless,
I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,
I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt stick at night.

I know I am august,
I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,
I see that the elementary laws never apologize,
(I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by, after all.)

I exist as I am, that is enough,
If no other in the world be aware I sit content,
And if each and all be aware I sit content.

One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,
And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten million years,
I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.

My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,
I laugh at what you call dissolution,
And I know the amplitude of time.

 Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,
Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,
In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,
Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,
Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.
   
The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,
My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.
   
The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me, 
I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;
You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.

I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west, the bride was a red girl,
Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking, they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets hanging from their shoulders,
On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,
She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.

The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside, 
I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile, 
Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,
And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,
And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,
And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some coarse clean clothes,
And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,
And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;
He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,
I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.
 I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the beginning and the end
But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.

There was never any more inception than there is now,
Nor any more youth or age than there is now,
And will never be any more perfection than there is now,
Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.

Urge and urge and urge,
Always the procreant urge of the world.

Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and increase, always sex,
Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.

To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.

Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well entretied, braced in the beams,
Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,
I and this mystery here we stand.

Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.

Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,
Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.

Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,
Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.

Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,
Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be less familiar than the rest.

I am satisfied—I see, dance, laugh, sing;
As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night, and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread.
Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with their plenty,
Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,
That they turn from gazing after and down the road,
And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,
Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?
 Trippers and askers surround me, People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and city I live in, or the nation, The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies,  authors old and new, My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues, The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love, The sickness of one of my folks or of myself or ill-doing or loss or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,Battles, the horrors of fatricidal war, the fever of doubtful news, the fitful events; These come to me days and nights and go from me again,But they are not the Me myself. Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am, Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary, Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest, Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next, Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it. Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with linguists and contenders, I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.   