 The Sphinx is drowsy,
        The wings are furled;
Her ear is heavy,
        She broods on the world.
"Who'll tell me my secret,
        The ages have kept?--
I awaited the seer,
        While they slumbered and slept;--

"The fate of the man-child;
        The meaning of man;
Known fruit of the unknown;
        Daedalian plan;
Out of sleeping a waking,
        Out of waking a sleep;
Life death overtaking;
        Deep underneath deep?

"Erect as a sunbeam,
        Upspringeth the palm;
The elephant browses,
        Undaunted and calm;
In beautiful motion
        The thrush plies his wings;
Kind leaves of his covert,
        Your silence he sings.

"The waves, unashamed,
        In difference sweet,
Play glad with the breezes,
        Old playfellows meet;
The journeying atoms,
        Primordial wholes,
Firmly draw, firmly drive,
        By their animate poles.

"Sea, earth, air, sound, silence,
        Plant, quadruped, bird,
By one music enchanted,
        One deity stirred,--
Each the other adorning,
        Accompany still;
Night veileth the morning,
        The vapor the hill.

"The babe by its mother
        Lies bathed in joy;
Glide its hours uncounted,--
        The sun is its toy;
Shines the peace of all being,
        Without cloud, in its eyes;
And the sum of the world
        In soft miniature lies.

"But man crouches and blushes,
        Absconds and conceals;
He creepeth and peepeth,
        He palters and steals;
Infirm, melancholy,
        Jealous glancing around,
An oaf, an accomplice,
        He poisons the ground.

"Outspoke the great mother,
        Beholding his fear;--
At the sound of her accents
        Cold shuddered the sphere:--
'Who has drugged my boy's cup?
        Who has mixed my boy's bread?
Who, with sadness and madness,
        Has turned the man-child's head?'" 

I heard a poet answer,
        Aloud and cheerfully,
"Say on, sweet Sphinx! thy dirges
        Are pleasant songs to me.
Deep love lieth under
        These pictures of time; 
They fad in the light of
        Their meaning sublime.

"The fiend that man harries
        Is love of the Best;
Yawns the pit of the Dragon,
        Lit by rays from the Blest.
The Lethe of nature
        Can't trace him again,
Whose soul sees the perfect,
        Which his eyes seek in vain.

"Profounder, profounder,
        Man's spirit must dive;
To his aye-rolling orbit
        No goal will arrive;
The heavens that now draw him
        With sweetness untold,
Once found,--for new heavens
        He spurneth the old.

"Pride ruined the angels,
        Their shame them restores;
And the joy that is sweetest
        Lurks in stings of remorse.
Have I a lover
        Who is noble and free?--
I would he were nobler
        Than to love me.

"Eterne alternation
        Now follows, now flied;
And under pain, pleasure,--
        Under pleasure, pain lies.
Love works at the centre,
        Heart-heaving alway;
Forth speed the strong pulses
        To the borders of day.

"Dull Sphinx, Jove keep thy five wits!
        Thy sight is growing blear;
Rue, myrrh, and cummin for the Sphinx--
        Her muddy eyes to clear!"--
The old Sphinx bit her thick lip,--
        Said, "Who taught thee me to name?
I am thy spirit, yoke-fellow,
        Of thine eye I am eyebeam.

"Thou art the unanswered question;
        Couldst see they proper eye,
Alway it asketh, asketh;
        And each answer is a lie.
So take thy quest through nature,
        It through thousand natures ply;
Ask on, thou clothed eternity;
        Time is the false reply."

Uprose the merry Sphinx,
        And crouched no more in stone;
She melted into purple cloud,
        She silvered in the moon;
She spired into a yellow flame;
        She flowered in blossoms red;
She flowed into a foaming wave;
        She stood Monadnoc's head.

Through a thousand voices
        Spoke the universal dame:
"Who telleth one of my meanings,
        Is master of all I am."
 I like a church; I like a cowl;
I love a prophet of the soul;
and on my heart monastic aisles
Fall like sweet strains, or pensive smiles;
Yet not for all his faith can see
Would I that cowled churchman be. 

Why should the vest on him alure,
Which I could not on me endure?

Not from a vain or shallow thought
His awful Jove young Phidias brought;
Never from lips of cunning fell
The thrilling Delphic oracle;
Out from the heart of nature rolled
The burdens of the Bible old;
the litanies of nations came,
Like the volcano's tongue of flame,
Up from the burning core below,--
The canticles of love and woe;
The hand that rounded Peter's dome,
And groined the aisles of Christian Rome,
Wrought in a sad sincerity;
Himself from God he could not free;
He builded better than he knew;--
The conscious stone to beauty grew. 

Know'st thou what wove yon woodbird's nest
Of leaves, and feathers from her breast?
Or how the fish outbuilt her shell,
Painting with morn each annual cell?
Or how the sacred pine-tree adds
To her old leaves new myriads?
Such and so grew these holy piles,
Whilst love and terror laid the tiles.
Earth proudly wears the Parthenon,
As the best gem upon her zone;
And Morning opes with hast her lids,
To gaze upon the Pyramids;
O'er england's abbeys bends the sky,
As on its friends, with kindred eye;
For, out of Thought's interior sphere,
These wonders rose to upper air;
And nature gladly gave them place,
Adopted them into her race,
And granted them an equal date
With Andes and with Ararat.

These temples grew as grows the grass;
Art might obey, but not surpass.
The passive master lent his hand
To the vast soul that o'er him planned;
And the same power that reared the shrine,
Bestrode the stibes that knelt within.
Ever the fiery Pntecost
Girds with one flame the countless host,
Trances the heart through chanting choirs,
And through the priest the mind inspired.
The word unto the prophet spoken
Was writ on tables yet unbroken;
The word by seers or sibyls told,
In groves of oak, or fanes of gold,
Still floats upon the morning wind,
Still whispers to the willing mind.
One accent of the Holy Ghost
The heedless world hath never lost.
I know what say the fathers wise,--
The Book itself before me lies,
Old Chrysostom, best Augustine,
And he who blent both in his line,
The younger Golden Lips or mines,
Taylor, the Shakspeare of divines.
His words are music in my ear,
I see his cowled portrait dear;
And yet, for all his faith could see,
I would not the good bishop be.
 By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
    Their flag to April’s breeze unfurled,
Here once the embattled farmers stood,
    And fired the shot heard round the world.

The foe long since in silence slept;
    Alike the conqueror silent sleeps;
And Time the ruined bridge has swept
    Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.

On this green bank, by this soft stream,
    We set to-day a votive stone;
That memory may their deed redeem,
    When, like our sires, our sons are gone.

Spirit, that made those heroes dare
    To die, and leave their children free,
Bid Time and Nature gently spare
    The shaft we raise to them and thee.
 If the red slayer think he slays,
    Or if the slain think he is slain,
They know not well the subtle ways
    I keep, and pass, and turn again.

Far or forgot to me is near;
    Shadow and sunlight are the same;
The vanished gods to me appear;
    And one to me are shame and fame.

They reckon ill who leave me out;
    When me they fly, I am the wings;
I am the doubter and the doubt;
    And I the hymn the Brahmin sings.

The strong gods pine for my abode,
    And pine in vain the sacred Seven,
But thou, meek lover of the good!
    Find me, and turn thy back on heaven.
 Daughters of Time, the hypocritic Days,
Muffled and dumb like barefoot dervishes,
And marching single in an endless file,
Bring diadems and fagots in their hands.
To each they offer gifts after his will,
Bread, kingdom, stars, and sky that holds them all.
I, in my pleached garden, watched the pomp,
Forgot my morning wishes, hastily
Took a few herbs and apples, and the Day
Turned and departed silent. I, too late,
Under her solemn fillet saw the scorn.
 The water understands
Civilization well;
It wets my foot, but prettily,
It chills my life, but wittily,
It is not disconcerted,
It is not broken-hearted:
Well used, it decketh joy,
Adorneth, doubleth joy:
Ill used, it will destroy,
In perfect time and measure
With a face of golden pleasure
Elegantly destroy.
 Bulkeley, Hunt, Willard, Hosmer, Meriam, Flint,Possessed the land which rendered to their toilHay, corn, roots, hemp, flax, apples, wool and wood.Each of these landlords walked amidst his farm,Saying, "'Tis mine, my children's and my name's.How sweet the west wind sounds in my own trees!How graceful climb those shadows on my hill!I fancy these pure waters and the glagsKnow me, as does my dog: we sympathize;And, I affirm, my actions smack of the soil."Where are these men? Asleep beneath their grounds:And strangers, fond as they, their furrows plough.Earth laughs in flowers, to see her boastful boysEarth-proud, proud of the earth which is not theirs;Who steer the plough, but cannot steer their feetClear of the grave.They added ridge to valley, brook to pond,And sighed for all that bounded their domain;"This suits me for a pasture; that's my park;We must have clay, lime, gravel, granite-ledge,And misty lowland, where to go for peat.The land is well—lies fairly to the south.'Tis good, when you have crossed the sea and back,To find the sitfast acres where you left them."Ah! the hot owner sees not Death, who addsHim to his land, a lump of mold the more.Hear what the Earth says: EARTH-SONG"Mine and yours;Mine, not yours.Earth endures;Stars abide—Shine down in the old sea;Old are the shores;But where are old men?I who have seen much,Such have I never seen."The lawyer's deedRan sure,In tail,To them, and to their heirsWho shall succeed,Without fail,Forevermore."Here is the land,Shaggy with wood,With its old valley,Mound and flood.But the heritors?Fled like the flood's foam.The lawyer, and the laws,And the kingdom,Clean swept herefrom."They called me theirs,Who so controlled me;Yet every oneWished to stay, and is gone,How am I theirs,If they cannot hold me,But I hold them?"When I heard the Earth-song,I was no longer brave;My avarice cooledLike lust in the chill of the grave.   Teach me I am forgotten by the deadAnd that the dead is by herself forgotAnd I no longer would keep terms with me.I would not murder, steal, or fornicate,Nor with ambition break the peace of townsBut I would bury my ambitionThe hope & action of my sovereign soulIn miserable ruin. Nor a hopeShould ever make a holiday for meI would not be the fool of accidentI would not have a project seek an endThat needed aughtBeyond the handful of my present meansThe sun of Duty drop from his firmamentTo be a rushlight for each petty endI would not harm my fellow menOn this low argument, 'twould harm myself.  Hast thou named all the birds without a gun?Loved the wood-rose, and left it on its stalk?At rich men’s tables eaten bread and pulse?Unarmed, faced danger with a heart of trust?And loved so well a high behavior,In man or maid, that thou from speech refrained,Nobility more nobly to repay?O, be my friend, and teach me to be thine!  And I behold once moreMy old familiar haunts; here the blue river,The same blue wonder that my infant eyeAdmired, sage doubting whence the traveller came,—Whence brought his sunny bubbles ere he washedThe fragrant flag-roots in my father’s fields,And where thereafter in the world he went.Look, here he is, unaltered, save that nowHe hath broke his banks and flooded all the valesWith his redundant waves.Here is the rock where, yet a simple child,I caught with bended pin my earliest fish,Much triumphing, —and these the fieldsOver whose flowers I chased the butterfly,A blooming hunter of a fairy fine.And hark! where overhead the ancient crowsHold their sour conversation in the sky:—These are the same, but I am not the same,But wiser than I was, and wise enoughNot to regret the changes, tho’ they costMe many a sigh. Oh, call not Nature dumb;These trees and stones are audible to me,These idle flowers, that tremble in the wind,I understand their faery syllables,And all their sad significance. The wind,That rustles down the well-known forest road—It hath a sound more eloquent than speech.The stream, the trees, the grass, the sighing wind,All of them utter sounds of ’monishmentAnd grave parental love.They are not of our race, they seem to say,And yet have knowledge of our moral race,And somewhat of majestic sympathy,Something of pity for the puny clay,That holds and boasts the immeasurable mind.I feel as I were welcome to these treesAfter long months of weary wandering,Acknowledged by their hospitable boughs;They know me as their son, for side by side,They were coeval with my ancestors,Adorned with them my country’s primitive times,And soon may give my dust their funeral shade.  Every day brings a ship,Every ship brings a word;Well for those who have no fear,Looking seaward well assuredThat the word the vessel bringsIs the word they wish to hear.  The sense of the world is short,—Long and various the report,—              To love and be beloved;Men and gods have not outlearned it;And, how oft soe’er they’ve turned it,              ’Tis not to be improved.
Mine are the night and morning,The pits of air, the gulf of space,The sportive sun, the gibbous moon,The innumerable days.
I hid in the solar glory,I am dumb in the pealing song,I rest on the pitch of the torrent,In slumber I am strong.
No numbers have counted my tallies,No tribes my house can fill,I sit by the shining Fount of Life,And pour the deluge still;
And ever by delicate powersGathering along the centuriesFrom race on race the rarest flowers,My wreath shall nothing miss.
And many a thousand summersMy apples ripened well,And light from meliorating starsWith firmer glory fell.
I wrote the past in charactersOf rock and fire the scroll,The building in the coral sea,The planting of the coal.
And thefts from satellites and ringsAnd broken stars I drew,And out of spent and aged thingsI formed the world anew;
What time the gods kept carnival,Tricked out in star and flower,And in cramp elf and saurian formsThey swathed their too much power.
Time and Thought were my surveyors,They laid their courses well,They boiled the sea, and baked the layersOr granite, marl, and shell.
But he, the man-child glorious,--Where tarries he the while?The rainbow shines his harbinger,The sunset gleams his smile.
My boreal lights leap upward,Forthright my planets roll,And still the man-child is not born,The summit of the whole.
Must time and tide forever run?Will never my winds go sleep in the west?Will never my wheels which whirl the sunAnd satellites have rest?
Too much of donning and doffing,Too slow the rainbow fades,I weary of my robe of snow,My leaves and my cascades;
I tire of globes and races,Too long the game is played;What without him is summer's pomp,Or winter's frozen shade?
I travail in pain for him,My creatures travail and wait;His couriers come by squadrons,He comes not to the gate.
Twice I have moulded an image,And thrice outstretched my hand,Made one of day, and one of night,And one of the salt sea-sand.
One in a Judaean manger,And one by Avon stream,One over against the mouths of Nile,And one in the Academe.
I moulded kings and saviours,And bards o'er kings to rule;--But fell the starry influence short,The cup was never full.
Yet whirl the glowing wheels once more,And mix the bowl again;Seethe, fate! the ancient elements,Heat, cold, wet, dry, and peace, and pain.
Let war and trade and creeds and songBlend, ripen race on race,The sunburnt world a man shall breedOf all the zones, and countless days.
No ray is dimmed, no atom worn,My oldest force is good as new,And the fresh rose on yonder thornGives back the bending heavens in dew.
In May, when sea-winds pierced our solitudes,
 I found the fresh Rhodora in the woods,
 Spreading its leafless blooms in a damp nook,
 To please the desert and the sluggish brook.
 The purple petals fallen in the pool
 Made the black water with their beauty gay;
 Here might the red-bird come his plumes to cool,
 And court the flower that cheapens his array.
 Rhodora! if the sages ask thee why
 This charm is wasted on the earth and sky,
 Tell them, dear, that, if eyes were made for seeing,
 Then beauty is its own excuse for Being;
 Why thou wert there, O rival of the rose!
 I never thought to ask; I never knew;
 But in my simple ignorance suppose
 The self-same power that brought me there, brought you.
[Read in Music Hall, January 1, 1863]
The word of the Lord by night
 To the watching Pilgrims came,
 As they sat by the seaside,
 And filled their hearts with flame.
God said, I am tired of kings,
 I suffer them no more;
 Up to my ear the morning brings
 The outrage of the poor.
Think ye I made this ball
 A field of havoc and war,
 Where tyrants great and tyrants small
 Might harry the weak and poor?
My angel,—his name is Freedom,—
 Choose him to be your king;
 He shall cut pathways east and west,
 And fend you with his wing.  
Lo! I uncover the land
 Which I hid of old time in the West,
 As the sculptor uncovers the statue
 When he has wrought his best;
I show Columbia, of the rocks
 Which dip their foot in the seas,
 And soar to the air-borne flocks
 Of clouds, and the boreal fleece.
I will divide my goods;
 Call in the wretch and slave:
 None shall rule but the humble,
 And none but Toil shall have.
I will have never a noble,
 No lineage counted great;
 Fishers and choppers and ploughmen
 Shall constitute a state.
Go, cut down trees in the forest,
 And trim the straightest boughs;
 Cut down trees in the forest,
 And build me a wooden house.
Call the people together,
 The young men and the sires,
 The digger in the harvest field,
 Hireling, and him that hires;
And here in a pine state-house
 They shall choose men to rule
 In every needful faculty,
 In church, and state, and school.
Lo, now! if these poor men
 Can govern the land and sea,
 And make just laws below the sun,
 As planets faithful be.
And ye shall succor men;
 'T is nobleness to serve;
 Help them who cannot help again:
 Beware from right to swerve.
I break your bonds and masterships,
 And I unchain the slave:
 Free be his heart and hand henceforth
 As wind and wandering wave.
I cause from every creature
 His proper good to flow:
 As much as he is and doeth,
 So much he shall bestow.
But, laying hands on another
 To coin his labor and sweat,
 He goes in pawn to his victim
 For eternal years in debt.
To-day unbind the captive,
 So only are ye unbound;
 Lift up a people from the dust,
 Trump of their rescue, sound!
Pay ransom to the owner,
 And fill the bag to the brim.
 Who is the owner? The slave is owner,
 And ever was. Pay him.
North! give him beauty for rags,
 And honor, South! for his shame;
 Nevada! coin thy golden crags
 With Freedom's image and name.
Up! and the dusky race
 That sat in darkness long,—
 Be swift their feet as antelopes,
 And as behemoth strong.
Come, East and West and North,
 By races, as snow-flakes,
 And carry my purpose forth,
 Which neither halts nor shakes.
My will fulfilled shall be,
 For, in daylight or in dark,
 My thunderbolt has eyes to see
 His way home to the mark.
Announced by all the trumpets of the sky,Arrives the snow, and, driving o'er the fields,Seems nowhere to alight: the whited airHides hills and woods, the river, and the heaven,And veils the farmhouse at the garden's end.The sled and traveler stopped, the courier's feetDelayed, all friends shut out, the housemates sitAround the radiant fireplace, enclosedIn a tumultuous privacy of storm.
   Come see the north wind's masonry.Out of an unseen quarry evermoreFurnished with tile, the fierce artificerCurves his white bastions with projected roofRound every windward stake, or tree, or door.Speeding, the myriad-handed, his wild workSo fanciful, so savage, nought cares heFor number or proportion. Mockingly,On coop or kennel he hangs Parian wreaths;A swan-like form invests the hidden thorn;Fills up the farmer's lane from wall to wall,Maugre the farmer's sighs; and, at the gate,A tapering turret overtops the work.And when his hours are numbered, and the worldIs all his own, retiring, as he were not,Leaves, when the sun appears, astonished ArtTo mimic in slow structures, stone by stone,Built in an age, the mad wind's night-work,The frolic architecture of the snow.
The mountain and the squirrel   Had a quarrel;   And the former called the latter ‘Little Prig.’ Bun replied,   ‘You are doubtless very big;          But all sorts of things and weather   Must be taken in together,   To make up a year   And a sphere.   And I think it no disgrace   To occupy my place.   If I'm not so large as you,   You are not so small as I,   And not half so spry.   I'll not deny you make   A very pretty squirrel track;   Talents differ; all is well and wisely put;   If I cannot carry forests on my back,   Neither can you crack a nut.’
